In the Beginning

We are told that in the very beginning "Heaven and Earth were not
yet separated, and the _In_ and _Yo_ not yet divided." This reminds
us of other cosmogony stories. The _In_ and _Yo_, corresponding to
the Chinese _Yang_ and _Yin_, were the male and female principles.
It was more convenient for the old Japanese writers to imagine the
coming into being of creation in terms not very remote from their
own manner of birth. In Polynesian mythology we find pretty much the
same conception, where Rangi and Papa represented Heaven and Earth,
and further parallels may be found in Egyptian and other cosmogony
stories. In nearly all we find the male and female principles taking
a prominent, and after all very rational, place. We are told in the
_Nihongi_ that these male and female principles "formed a chaotic
mass like an egg which was of obscurely defined limits and contained
germs." Eventually this egg was quickened into life, and the purer and
clearer part was drawn out and formed Heaven, while the heavier element
settled down and became Earth, which was "compared to the floating
of a fish sporting on the surface of the water." A mysterious form
resembling a reed-shoot suddenly appeared between Heaven and Earth,
and as suddenly became transformed into a God called Kuni-toko-tachi,
("Land-eternal-stand-of-august-thing"). We may pass over the other
divine births until we come to the important deities known as Izanagi
and Izanami ("Male-who-invites" and "Female-who-invites"). About these
beings has been woven an entrancing myth.

Izanagi and Izanami

Izanagi and Izanami stood on the Floating Bridge of Heaven and
looked down into the abyss. They inquired of each other if there
were a country far, far below the great Floating Bridge. They
were determined to find out. In order to do so they thrust down a
jewel-spear, and found the ocean. Raising the spear a little, water
dripped from it, coagulated, and became the island of Onogoro-jima
("Spontaneously-congeal-island").

Upon this island the two deities descended. Shortly afterwards they
desired to become husband and wife, though as a matter of fact they
were brother and sister; but such a relationship in the East has never
precluded marriage. These deities accordingly set up a pillar on the
island. Izanagi walked round one way, and Izanami the other. When they
met, Izanami said: "How delightful! I have met with a lovely youth."
One would have thought that this naïve remark would have pleased
Izanagi; but it made him, extremely angry, and he retorted: "I am a
man, and by that right should have spoken first. How is it that on the
contrary thou, a woman, shouldst have been the first to speak? This is
unlucky. Let us go round again." So it happened that the two deities
started afresh. Once again they met, and this time Izanagi remarked:
"How delightful! I have met a lovely maiden." Shortly after this very
ingenuous proposal Izanagi and Izanami were married.

When Izanami had given birth to islands, seas, rivers, herbs, and
trees, she and her lord consulted together, saying: "We have now
produced the Great-Eight-Island country, with the mountains, rivers,
herbs, and trees. Why should we not produce some one who shall be the
Lord of the Universe?"

The wish of these deities was fulfilled, for in due season
Ama-terasu, the Sun Goddess, was born. She was known as
"Heaven-Illumine-of-Great-Deity," and was so extremely beautiful that
her parents determined to send her up the Ladder of Heaven, and in the
high sky above to cast for ever her glorious sunshine upon the earth.

Their next child was the Moon God, Tsuki-yumi. His silver radiance was
not so fair as the golden effulgence of his sister, the Sun Goddess,
but he was, nevertheless, deemed worthy to be her consort. So up the
Ladder of Heaven climbed the Moon God. They soon quarrelled, and
Ama-terasu said: "Thou art a wicked deity. I must not see thee face
to face." They were therefore separated by a day and night, and dwelt
apart.

The next child of Izanagi and Izanami was Susa-no-o ("The Impetuous
Male"). We shall return to Susa-no-o and his doings later on, and
content ourselves for the present with confining our attention to his
parents.

Izanami gave birth to the Fire God, Kagu-tsuchi. The birth of this
child made her extremely ill. Izanagi knelt on the ground, bitterly
weeping and lamenting. But his sorrow availed nothing, and Izanami
crept away into the Land of Yomi (Hades).

Her lord, however, could not live without her, and he too went into the
Land of Yomi. When he discovered her, she said regretfully: "My lord
and husband, why is thy coming so late? I have already eaten of the
cooking-furnace of Yomi. Nevertheless, I am about to lie down to rest.
I pray thee do not look at me."

Izanagi, moved by curiosity, refused to fulfil her wish. It was dark in
the Land of Yomi, so he secretly took out his many-toothed comb, broke
off a piece, and lighted it. The sight that greeted him was ghastly
and horrible in the extreme. His once beautiful wife had now become a
swollen and festering creature. Eight varieties of Thunder Gods rested
upon her. The Thunder of the Fire, Earth, and Mountain were all there
leering upon him, and roaring with their great voices.

Izanagi grew frightened and disgusted, saying: "I have come unawares to
a hideous and polluted land." His wife retorted: "Why didst thou not
observe that which I charged thee? Now am I put to shame."

Izanami was so angry with her lord for ignoring her wish and breaking
in upon her privacy that she sent the Eight Ugly Females of Yomi to
pursue him. Izanagi drew his sword and fled down the dark regions of
the Underworld. As he ran he took off his headdress, and flung it to
the ground. It immediately became a bunch of grapes. When the Ugly
Females saw it, they bent down and ate the luscious fruit. Izanami saw
them pause, and deemed it wise to pursue her lord herself.

By this time Izanagi had reached the Even Pass of Yomi. Here he placed
a huge rock, and eventually came face to face with Izanami. One would
scarcely have thought that amid such exciting adventures Izanagi
would have solemnly declared a divorce. But this is just what he did
do. To this proposal his wife replied: "My dear lord and husband, if
thou sayest so, I will strangle to death the people in one day." This
plaintive and threatening speech in no way influenced Izanagi, who
readily replied that he would cause to be born in one day no less than
fifteen hundred.

The above remark must have proved conclusive, for when we next hear
of Izanagi he had escaped from the Land of Yomi, from an angry wife,
and from the Eight Ugly Females. After his escape he was engaged in
copious ablutions, by way of purification, from which numerous deities
were born. We read in the _Nihongi_: "After this, Izanagi, his divine
task having been accomplished, and his spirit-career about to suffer a
change, built himself an abode of gloom in the island of Ahaji, where
he dwelt for ever in silence and concealment."

Ama-terasu and Susa-no-o

Susa-no-o, or "The Impetuous Male," was the brother of Ama-terasu, the
Sun Goddess. Now Susa-no-o was a very undesirable deity indeed, and he
figured in the Realm of the Japanese Gods as a decidedly disturbing
element. His character has been clearly drawn in the _Nihongi_, more
clearly perhaps than that of any other deity mentioned in these ancient
records. Susa-no-o had a very bad temper, which often resulted in many
cruel and ungenerous acts. Moreover, in spite of his long beard, he had
a habit of continually weeping and wailing. Where a child in a tantrum
would crush a toy to pieces, the Impetuous Male, when in a towering
rage, and without a moment's warning, would wither the once fair
greenery of mountains, and in addition bring many people to an untimely
end.

His parents, Izanagi and Izanami, were much troubled by his doings,
and, after consulting together, they decided to banish their unruly son
to the Land of Yomi. Susa, however, had a word to say in the matter. He
made the following petition, saying: "I will now obey thy instructions
and proceed to the Nether-Land (Yomi). Therefore I wish for a short
time to go to the Plain of High Heaven and meet with my elder sister
(Ama-terasu), after which I will go away for ever." This apparently
harmless request was granted, and Susa-no-o ascended to Heaven. His
departure occasioned a great commotion of the sea, and the hills and
mountains groaned aloud.

Now Ama-terasu heard these noises, and perceiving that they denoted the
near approach of her wicked brother Susa-no-o, she said to herself:
"Is my younger brother coming with good intentions? I think it must be
his purpose to rob me of my kingdom. By the charge which our parents
gave to their children, each of us has his own allotted limits. Why,
therefore, does he reject the kingdom to which he should proceed, and
make bold to come spying here?"

Ama-terasu then prepared for warfare. She tied her hair into knots and
hung jewels upon it, and round her wrists "an august string of five
hundred Yasaka jewels." She presented a very formidable appearance
when in addition she slung over her back "a thousand-arrow quiver and
a five-hundred-arrow quiver," and protected her arms with pads to
deaden the recoil of the bowstring. Having arrayed herself for deadly
combat, she brandished her bow, grasped her sword-hilt, and stamped on
the ground till she had made a hole sufficiently large to serve as a
fortification.

All this elaborate and ingenious preparation was in vain. The Impetuous
Male adopted the manner of a penitent. "From the beginning," he said,
"my heart has not been black. But as, in obedience to the stern behest
of our parents, I am about to depart for ever to the Nether-Land, how
could I bear to depart without having seen face to face thee my elder
sister? It is for this reason that I have traversed on foot the clouds
and mists and have come hither from afar. I am surprised that my elder
sister should, on the contrary, put on so stern a countenance."

Ama-terasu regarded these remarks with a certain amount of suspicion.
Susa-no-o's filial piety and Susa-no-o's cruelty were not easily to
be reconciled. She thereupon resolved to test his sincerity by a
remarkable proceeding we need not describe. Suffice it to say that for
the time being the test proved the Impetuous Male's purity of heart and
general sincerity towards his sister.

But Susa-no-o's good behaviour was a very short-lived affair indeed. It
happened that Ama-terasu had made a number of excellent rice-fields in
Heaven. Some were narrow and some were long, and Ama-terasu was justly
proud of these rice-fields. No sooner had she sown the seed in the
spring than Susa-no-o broke down the divisions between the plots, and
in the autumn let loose a number of piebald colts.

One day when he saw his sister in the sacred Weaving Hall, weaving the
garments of the Gods, he made a hole through the roof and flung down
a flayed horse. Ama-terasu was so frightened that she accidentally
wounded herself with the shuttle. Extremely angry, she determined to
leave her abode; so, gathering her shining robes about her, she crept
down the blue sky, entered a cave, fastened it securely, and there
dwelt in seclusion.

Now the world was in darkness, and the alternation of night and day
was unknown. When this dreadful catastrophe had taken place the
Eighty Myriads of Gods assembled together on the bank of the River
of Heaven and discussed how they might best persuade Ama-terasu to
grace Heaven once more with her shining glory. No less a God than
"Thought-combining," after much profound reasoning, gathered together a
number of singing-birds from the Eternal Land. After sundry divinations
with a deer's leg-bone, over a fire of cherry-bark, the Gods made a
number of tools, bellows, and forges. Stars were welded together to
form a mirror, and jewellery and musical instruments were eventually
fashioned.

When all these things had been duly accomplished the Eighty Myriads
of Gods came down to the rock-cavern where the Sun Goddess lay
concealed, and gave an elaborate entertainment. On the upper branches
of the True Sakaki Tree they hung the precious jewels, and on the
middle branches the mirror. From every side there was a great singing
of birds, which was only the prelude to what followed. Now Uzume
("Heavenly-alarming-female") took in her hand a spear wreathed with
Eulalia grass, and made a headdress of the True Sakaki Tree. Then she
placed a tub upside down, and proceeded to dance in a very immodest
manner, till the Eighty Myriad Gods began to roar with laughter.

Such extraordinary proceedings naturally awakened the curiosity of
Ama-terasu, and she peeped forth. Once more the world became golden
with her presence. Once more she dwelt in the Plain of High Heaven, and
Susa-no-o was duly chastised and banished to the Yomi Land.

Susa-no-o and the Serpent

With the usual inconsistency of myths and legends, we are not surprised
to find that all reference to Susa dwelling in the Land of Yomi is
entirely omitted. When we next see him it is apart from his usual
mischievous disposition. Indeed, we find him in a _rôle_ worthy of
one of the Knights of the Round Table. Whether the sudden display
of knight-errantry was a cunning move on his part for some ulterior
motive, or whether his sister's sudden withdrawal from Heaven had made
him permanently reform his ways, we are left in entire ignorance.

[Illustration: Uzume Awakens the curiosity of Ama-terasu.--28]

Susa-no-o, having descended from Heaven, arrived at the river Hi, in
the province of Idzumo. Here he was disturbed by a sound of weeping.
It was so unusual to hear any other than himself weep that he went in
search of the cause of the sorrow. He discovered an old man and an old
woman. Between them was a young girl, whom they fondly caressed and
gazed at with pitiful eyes, as if they were reluctantly bidding her
a last farewell. When Susa-no-o asked the old couple who they were
and why they lamented, the old man replied: "I am an Earthly Deity,
and my name is Ashi-nadzuchi ("Foot-stroke-elder"). My wife's name is
Tenadzuchi ("Hand-stroke-elder"). This girl is our daughter, and her
name is Kushi-nada-hime ("Wondrous-Inada-Princess"). The reason of our
weeping is that formerly we had eight children, daughters; but they
have been devoured year by year by an eight-forked serpent, and now
the time approaches for this girl to be devoured. There is no means of
escape for her, and therefore do we grieve exceedingly."

The Impetuous Male listened to this painful recital with profound
attention, and, perceiving that the maiden was extremely beautiful, he
offered to slay the eight-forked serpent if her parents would give her
to him in marriage as a fitting reward for his services. This request
was readily granted.

Susa-no-o now changed Kushi-nada-hime into a many-toothed comb and
stuck it in his hair. Then he bade the old couple brew a quantity of
_saké_. When the _saké_ was ready, he poured it into eight tubs, and
awaited the coming of the dreadful monster.

Eventually the serpent came. It had eight heads, and the eyes were
red, "like winter-cherry." Moreover it had eight tails, and firs and
cypress-trees grew on its back. It was in length the space of eight
hills and eight valleys. Its lumbering progress was necessarily
slow, but finding the _saké_, each head eagerly drank the tempting
beverage till the serpent became extremely drunk, and fell asleep. Then
Susa-no-o, having little to fear, drew his ten-span sword and chopped
the great monster into little pieces. When he struck one of the tails
his weapon became notched, and bending down he discovered a sword
called the Murakumo-no-Tsurugi. Perceiving it to be a divine sword, he
gave it to the Gods of Heaven.

Having successfully accomplished his task, Susa-no-o converted the
many-toothed comb into Kushi-nada-hime again, and at length came to
Suga, in the province of Idzumo, in order that he might celebrate his
marriage. Here he composed the following verse:

     "Many clouds arise,
     On all sides a manifold fence,
     To receive within it the spouses,
     They form a manifold fence--
     Ah! that manifold fence!"
                     _Nihongiy_, trans. by W. G. Aston.

[Illustration: Susa-no-o and Kushi-nada-hime.--30]

The Divine Messengers

Now at that time the Gods assembled in the High Plain of Heaven were
aware of continual disturbances in the Central Land of Reed-Plains
(Idzumo). We are told that "Plains, the rocks, tree-stems, and
herbage have still the power of speech. At night they make a
clamour like that of flames of fire; in the day-time they swarm up
like flies in the fifth month." In addition certain deities made
themselves objectionable. The Gods determined to put an end to these
disturbances, and after a consultation Taka-mi-musubi decided to send
his grandchild Ninigi to govern the Central Land of Reed-Plains,
to wipe out insurrection, and to bring peace and prosperity to the
country. It was deemed necessary to send messengers to prepare the
way in advance. The first envoy was Ama-no-ho; but as he spent three
years in the country without reporting to the Gods, his son was sent
in his place. He adopted the same course as his father, and defied
the orders of the Heavenly Ones. The third messenger was Ame-waka
("Heaven-young-Prince"). He, too, was disloyal, in spite of his noble
weapons, and instead of going about his duties he fell in love and took
to wife Shita-teru-hime ("Lower-shine-Princess").

Now the assembled Gods grew angry at the long delay, and sent a
pheasant down to ascertain what was going on in Idzumo. The pheasant
perched on the top of a cassia-tree before Ame-waka's gate. When
Ame-waka saw the bird he immediately shot it. The arrow went through
the bird, rose into the Place of Gods, and was hurled back again, so
that it killed the disloyal and idle Ame-waka.

The weeping of Lower-shine-Princess reached Heaven, for she loved her
lord and failed to recognise in his sudden death the just vengeance
of the Gods. She wept so loud and so pitifully that the Heavenly Ones
heard her. A swift wind descended, and the body of Ame-waka floated up
into the High Plain of Heaven. A mortuary house was made, in which the
deceased was laid. Mr. Frank Rinder writes: "For eight days and eight
nights there was wailing and lamentation. The wild goose of the river,
the heron, the kingfisher, the sparrow, and the pheasant mourned with a
great mourning."

Now it happened that a friend of Ame-waka, Aji-shi-ki by name, heard
the sad dirges proceeding from Heaven. He therefore offered his
condolence. He so resembled the deceased that when Ame-waka's parents,
relations, wife, and children saw him, they exclaimed: "Our lord is
still alive!" This greatly angered Aji-shi-ki, and he drew his sword
and cut down the mortuary house, so that it fell to the Earth and
became the mountain of Moyama.

We are told that the glory of Aji-shi-ki was so effulgent that it
illuminated the space of two hills and two valleys. Those assembled for
the mourning celebrations uttered the following song:

     "Like the string of jewels
     Worn on the neck
     Of the Weaving-maiden,
     That dwells in Heaven--
     Oh! the lustre of the jewels
     Flung across two valleys
     From Aji-suki-taka-hiko-ne!

     "To the side-pool--
     The side-pool
     Of the rocky stream
     Whose narrows are crossed
     By the country wenches
     Afar from Heaven,
     Come hither, come hither!
     (The women are fair)
     And spread across thy net
     In the side-pool
     Of the rocky stream."
                      _Nihongi_, trans. by W. G. Aston.


Two more Gods were sent to the Central Land of Reed-Plains, and these
Gods were successful in their mission. They returned to Heaven with a
favourable report, saying that all was now ready for the coming of the
August Grandchild.

The Coming of the August Grandchild

Ama-terasu presented her grandson Ninigi, or Prince
Rice-Ear-Ruddy-Plenty, with many gifts. She gave him precious stones
from the mountain-steps of Heaven, white crystal balls, and, most
valuable gift of all, the divine sword that Susa-no-o had discovered
in the serpent. She also gave him the star-mirror into which she had
gazed when peeping out of her cave. Several deities accompanied Ninigi,
including that lively maiden of mirth and dance Uzume, whose dancing,
it will be remembered, so amused the Gods.

Ninigi and his companions had hardly broken through the clouds and
arrived at the eight-forked road of Heaven, when they discovered, much
to their alarm, a gigantic creature with large and brightly shining
eyes. So formidable was his aspect that Ninigi and all his companions,
except the merry and bewitching Uzume, started to turn back with intent
to abandon their mission. But Uzume went up to the giant and demanded
who it was that dared to impede their progress. The giant replied: "I
am the Deity of the Field-paths. I come to pay my homage to Ninigi, and
beg to have the honour to be his guide. Return to your master, O fair
Uzume, and give him this message."

So Uzume returned and gave her message to the Gods, who had so
ignominiously retreated. When they heard the good news they greatly
rejoiced, burst once more through the clouds, rested on the Floating
Bridge of Heaven, and finally reached the summit of Takachihi.

The August Grandchild, with the Deity of the Field-paths for guide,
travelled from end to end of the kingdom over which he was to rule.
When he had reached a particularly charming spot, he built a palace.

Ninigi was so pleased with the service the Deity of the Field-paths had
rendered him that he gave that giant the merry Uzume to wife.

Ninigi, after having romantically rewarded his faithful guide, began
to feel the stirring of love himself, when one day, while walking
along the shore, he saw an extremely lovely maiden. "Who are you, most
beautiful lady?" inquired Ninigi. She replied: "I am the daughter of
the Great-Mountain-Possessor. My name is Ko-no-Hana, the Princess who
makes the Flowers of the Trees to Blossom."

Ninigi fell in love with Ko-no-Hana. He went with all haste to her
father, Oho-yama, and begged that he would favour him with his
daughter's hand.

Oho-yama had an elder daughter, Iha-naga, Princess Long-as-the-Rocks.
As her name implies, she was not at all beautiful; but her father
desired that Ninigi's children should have life as eternal as the
life of rocks. He therefore presented both his daughters to Ninigi,
expressing the hope that the suitor's choice would fall upon Iha-naga.
Just as Cinderella, and not her ugly sisters, is dear to children of
our own country, so did Ninigi remain true to his choice, and would not
even look upon Iha-naga. This neglect made Princess Long-as-the-Rocks
extremely angry. She cried out, with more vehemence than modesty: "Had
you chosen me, you and your children would have lived long in the
land. Now that you have chosen my sister, you and yours will perish as
quickly as the blossom of trees, as quickly as the bloom on my sister's
cheek."

However, Ninigi and Ko-no-Hana lived happily together for some time;
but one day jealousy came to Ninigi and robbed him of his peace of
mind. He had no cause to be jealous, and Ko-no-Hana much resented his
treatment. She retired to a little wooden hut, and set it on fire. From
the flames came three baby boys. We need only concern ourselves with
two of them--Hoderi ("Fire-shine") and Hoori ("Fire-fade"). Hoori, as
we shall see later on, was the grandfather of the first Mikado of Japan.

[Illustration: Hoori and the Sea God's Daughter.--34]


In the Palace of the Sea God

Hoderi was a great fisherman, while his younger brother, Hoori, was
an accomplished hunter. One day they exclaimed: "Let us for a trial
exchange gifts." This they did, but the elder brother, who could
catch fish to some purpose, came home without any spoil when he went
a-hunting. He therefore returned the bow and arrows, and asked his
younger brother for the fish-hook. Now it so happened that Hoori had
lost his brother's fish-hook. The generous offer of a new hook to take
the place of the old one was scornfully refused. He also refused to
accept a heaped-up tray of fish-hooks. To this offer the elder brother
replied: "These are not my old fish-hook: though they are many, I will
not take them."

Now Hoori was sore troubled by his brother's harshness, so he went down
to the sea-shore and there gave way to his grief. A kind old man by the
name of Shiko-tsutsu no Oji ("Salt-sea-elder") said: "Why dost thou
grieve here?" When the sad tale was told, the old man replied: "Grieve
no more. I will arrange this matter for thee."

True to his word, the old man made a basket, set Hoori in it, and then
sank it in the sea. After descending deep down in the water Hoori came
to a pleasant strand rich with all manner of fantastic seaweed. Here he
abandoned the basket and eventually arrived at the Palace of the Sea
God.

Now this palace was extremely imposing. It had battlements and turrets
and stately towers. A well stood at the gate, and over the well there
was a cassia-tree. Here Hoori loitered in the pleasant shade. He had
not stood there long before a beautiful woman appeared. As she was
about to draw water, she raised her eyes, saw the stranger, and
immediately returned, with much alarm, to tell her mother and father
what she had seen.

The God of the Sea, when he had heard the news, "prepared an eightfold
cushion" and led the stranger in, asking his visitor why he had
been honoured by his presence. When Hoori explained the sad loss of
his brother's fish-hook the Sea God assembled all the fishes of his
kingdom, "broad of fin and narrow of fin." And when the thousands upon
thousands of fishes were assembled, the Sea God asked them if they
knew anything about the missing fish-hook. "We know not," answered the
fishes. "Only the Red-woman (the _tai_) has had a sore mouth for some
time past, and has not come." She was accordingly summoned, and on her
mouth being opened the lost fish-hook was discovered.

Hoori then took to wife the Sea God's daughter, Toyo-tama
("Rich-jewel"), and they dwelt together in the palace under the sea.
For three years all went well, but after a time Hoori hungered for a
sight of his own country, and possibly he may have remembered that
he had yet to restore the fish-hook to his elder brother. These not
unnatural feelings troubled the heart of the loving Toyo-tama, and she
went to her father and told him of her sorrow. But the Sea God, who
was always urbane and courteous, in no way resented his son-in-law's
behaviour. On the contrary he gave him the fish-hook, saying: "When
thou givest this fish-hook to thy elder brother, before giving it to
him, call to it secretly, and say, 'A poor hook!'" He also presented
Hoori with the Jewel of the Flowing Tide and the Jewel of the Ebbing
Tide, saying: "If thou dost dip the Tide-flowing Jewel, the tide will
suddenly flow, and therewithal thou shalt drown thine elder brother.
But in case thy elder brother should repent and beg forgiveness,
if, on the contrary, thou dip the Tide-ebbing Jewel, the tide will
spontaneously ebb, and therewithal thou shalt save him. If thou harass
him in this way thy elder brother will of his own accord render
submission."

Just before Hoori was about to depart his wife came to him and told him
that she was soon to give him a child. Said she: "On a day when the
winds and waves are raging I will surely come forth to the seashore.
Build for me a house, and await me there."

Hoderi and Hoori Reconciled

When Hoori reached his own home he found his elder brother, who
admitted his offence and begged for forgiveness, which was readily
granted.

Toyo-tama and her younger sister bravely confronted the winds and
waves, and came to the sea-shore. There Hoori had built a hut roofed
with cormorant feathers, and there in due season she gave birth
to a son. When Toyo-tama had blessed her lord with offspring, she
turned into a dragon and slipped back into the sea. Hoori's son
married his aunt, and was the father of four children, one of whom
was Kamu-Yamato-Iware-Biko, who is said to have been the first human
Emperor of Japan, and is now known as Jimmu Tennō.

HEROES AND WARRIORS


Yorimasa

A long time ago a certain Emperor became seriously ill. He was unable
to sleep at night owing to a most horrible and unaccountable noise he
heard proceeding from the roof of the palace, called the Purple Hall of
the North Star. A number of his courtiers decided to lie in wait for
this strange nocturnal visitor. As soon as the sun set they noticed
that a dark cloud crept from the eastern horizon, and alighted on the
roof of the august palace. Those who waited in the imperial bed-chamber
heard extraordinary scratching sounds, as if what had at first appeared
to be a cloud had suddenly changed into a beast with gigantic and
powerful claws.

Night after night this terrible visitant came, and night after night
the Emperor grew worse. He at last became so ill that it was obvious to
all those in attendance upon him that unless something could be done to
destroy this monster the Emperor would certainly die.

At last it was decided that Yorimasa was the one knight in the kingdom
valiant enough to relieve his Majesty of these terrible hauntings.
Yorimasa accordingly made elaborate preparations for the fray. He took
his best bow and steel-headed arrows, donned his armour, over which he
wore a hunting-dress, and a ceremonial cap instead of his usual helmet.

[Illustration: Yorimasa slays the Vampire.--38]

At sunset he lay in concealment outside the palace. While he thus
waited thunder crashed overhead, lightning blazed in the sky, and the
wind shrieked like a pack of wild demons. But Yorimasa was a brave
man, and the fury of the elements in no way daunted him. When midnight
came he saw a black cloud rush through the sky and rest upon the
roof of the palace. At the north-east corner it stopped. Once more the
lightning flashed in the sky, and this time he saw the gleaming eyes of
a large animal. Noting the exact position of this strange monster, he
pulled at his bow till it became as round as the full moon. In another
moment his steel-headed arrow hit its mark. There was an awful roar of
anger, and then a heavy thud as the huge monster rolled from the palace
roof to the ground.

Yorimasa and his retainer ran forward and despatched the fearful
creature they saw before them. This evil monster of the night was as
large as a horse. It had the head of an ape, and the body and claws
were like those of a tiger, with a serpent's tail, wings of a bird, and
the scales of a dragon.

It was no wonder that the Emperor gave orders that the skin of this
monster should be kept for all time as a curiosity in the Imperial
treasure-house. From the very moment the creature died the Emperor's
health rapidly improved, and Yorimasa was rewarded for his services by
being presented with a sword called Shishi-wo, which means "the King
of Lions." He was also promoted at Court, and finally married the Lady
Ayame, the most beautiful of ladies-in-waiting at the Imperial Court.

Yoshitsune and Benkei

We may compare Yoshitsune with the Black Prince or Henry V., and
Benkei with "Little John, Will Scarlet, and Friar Tuck rolled in
one." Yoshitsune would have seemed a very remarkable hero had not
his faithful henchman, Benkei, also figured in Japanese history and
legend. As it is we are forced to admit that Benkei was far and away
the greater man. He not only towered in stature above his companions,
but he rose above his brethren in courage, wit, resource, and a
wonderful tenderness. Here was a man who could slay a hundred men with
absolute ease, and with the same quiet assurance expound the Buddhist
Scriptures. He could weep over Yoshitsune when, by way of strategy, he
found it necessary to severely beat him, and with infinite gentleness
render assistance when his lord's wife gave birth to a son. There
was yet another side to Benkei's versatile character--his love of a
practical joke. The bell incident, referred to elsewhere, is a case in
point, and his enormous feast at the expense of a number of priests
another; but if he had his joke he never failed to pay for the laugh to
the full. Benkei remarked on one occasion: "When there is an unlucky
lot to draw my lord sees to it that I am the one to get it." This was
certainly true. Benkei always made a point of doing the dirty work, and
when his master asked him to do anything Benkei's only complaint was
that the task was not sufficiently difficult, though as a matter of
fact it was often so dangerous that it would have frightened a dozen
less gifted heroes.

We are told that when Benkei was born he had long hair, a complete
set of teeth, and, moreover, that he could run as swiftly as the
wind. Benkei was too big for a modest Japanese home. When he struck
Jin-saku's anvil that useful object sank deep into the earth, and for
firewood he would bring a great pine-tree. When Benkei was seventeen
years old he became a priest in a Buddhist temple; but that did not
prevent him from having a thrilling escapade with a beautiful young
girl called Tamamushi. We soon find our hero breaking away from love
and priestcraft, and entirely devoting his attention to the exciting
adventures of a lawless warrior. Here, for the moment, we must leave
him, and give the story of Yoshitsune, and how he had the good fortune
to meet and retain the service and friendship of Benkei till his dying
day.

Yoshitsune and the Taira

Yoshitsune's father, Yoshitomo, had been killed in a great battle with
the Taira. At that time the Taira clan was all-powerful, and its cruel
leader, Kiyomori, did all he could to destroy Yoshitomo's children.
But the mother of these children, Tokiwa, fled into hiding, taking
her little ones with her. With characteristic Japanese fortitude, she
finally consented to become the wife of the hated Kiyomori. She did so
because it was the only way to save the lives of her children. She was
allowed to keep Yoshitsune with her, and she daily whispered to him:
"Remember thy father, Minamoto Yoshitomo! Grow strong and avenge his
death, for he died at the hands of the Taira!"

When Yoshitsune was seven years of age he was sent to a monastery to
be brought up as a monk. Though diligent in his studies, the young
boy ever treasured in his heart the dauntless words of his brave,
self-sacrificing mother. They stirred and quickened him to action. He
used to go to a certain valley, where he would flourish his little
wooden sword, and, singing fragments of war-songs, hit out at rocks
and stones, desiring that he might one day become a great warrior, and
right the wrongs so heavily heaped upon his family by the Taira clan.

One night, while thus engaged, he was startled by a great thunderstorm,
and saw before him a mighty giant with a long red nose and enormous
glaring eyes, bird-like claws, and feathered wings. Bravely standing
his ground, Yoshitsune inquired who this giant might be, and was
informed that he was King of the Tengu--that is, King of the elves of
the mountains, sprightly little beings who were frequently engaged in
all manner of fantastic tricks.

The King of the Tengu was very kindly disposed towards Yoshitsune. He
explained that he admired his perseverance, and told him that he had
appeared upon the scene with the meritorious intention of teaching him
all that was to be learnt in the art of swordsmanship. The lessons
progressed in a most satisfactory manner, and it was not long before
Yoshitsune could vanquish as many as twenty small _tengu_, and this
extreme agility stood Yoshitsune in very good stead, as we shall see
later on in the story.

Now when Yoshitsune was fifteen years old he heard that there lived on
Mount Hiei a very wild _bonze_ (priest) by the name of Benkei. Benkei
had for some time waylaid knights who happened to cross the Gojo Bridge
of Kyōto. His idea was to obtain a thousand swords, and he was so
brave, although such a rascal, that he had won from knights no less
than nine hundred and ninety-nine swords by his lawless behaviour. When
the news of these doings reached the ears of Yoshitsune he determined
to put the teaching of the King of the Tengu to good use and slay this
Benkei, and so put an end to one who had become a terror in the land.

One evening Yoshitsune started out, and, in order to establish the
manner and bearing of absolute indifference, he played upon his flute
till he came to the Gojo Bridge. Presently he saw coming towards him
a gigantic man clad in black armour, who was none other than Benkei.
When Benkei saw the youth he considered it to be beneath his dignity
to attack what appeared to him to be a mere weakling, a dreamer who
could play excellently, and no doubt write a pretty poem about the
moon, which was then shining in the sky, but one who was in no way a
warrior. This affront naturally angered Yoshitsune, and he suddenly
kicked Benkei's halberd out of his hand.

[Illustration: Yoshitsune and Benkei attacked by a ghostly company of
the Taira Clan.--42]

Yoshitsune and Benkei Fight

Benkei gave a growl of rage, and cut about indiscriminately with
his weapon. But the sprightliness of the _tengu_ teaching favoured
Yoshitsune. He jumped from side to side, from the front to the rear,
and from the rear to the front again, mocking the giant with many a
jest and many a peal of ringing laughter. Round and round went Benkei's
weapon, always striking either the air or the ground, and ever missing
its adversary.

At last Benkei grew weary, and once again Yoshitsune knocked the
halberd out of the giant's hand. In trying to regain his weapon
Yoshitsune tripped him up, so that he stumbled upon his hands and
knees, and the hero, with a cry of triumph, mounted upon the now
four-legged Benkei. The giant was utterly amazed at his defeat, and
when he was told that the victor was none other than the son of Lord
Yoshitomo he not only took his defeat in a manly fashion, but begged
that he might henceforth become a retainer of the young conqueror.

From this time we find the names of Yoshitsune and Benkei linked
together, and in all the stories of warriors, whether in Japan or
elsewhere, never was there a more valiant and harmonious union of
strength and friendship. We hear of them winning numerous victories
over the Taira, finally driving them to the sea, where they perished at
Dan-no-ura.

We get one more glimpse of Dan-no-ura from a legendary point of view.
Yoshitsune and his faithful henchman arranged to cross in a ship from
the province of Settsu to Saikoku. When they reached Dan-no-ura a
great storm arose. Mysterious noises came from the towering waves, a
far-away echo of the din of battle, of the rushing of ships and the
whirling of arrows, of the footfall of a thousand men. Louder and
louder the noise grew, and from the lashing crests of the waves there
arose a ghostly company of the Taira clan. Their armour was torn and
blood-stained, and they thrust out their vaporous arms and tried to
stop the boat in which Yoshitsune and Benkei sailed. It was a ghostly
reminiscence of the battle of Dan-no-ura, when the Taira had suffered
a terrible and permanent defeat. Yoshitsune, when he saw this great
phantom host, cried out for revenge even upon the ghosts of the Taira
dead; but Benkei, always shrewd and circumspect, bade his master lay
aside the sword, and took out a rosary and recited a number of Buddhist
prayers. Peace came to the great company of ghosts, the wailing ceased,
and gradually they faded into the sea which now became calm.

Legend tells us that fishermen still see from time to time ghostly
armies come out of the sea and wail and shake their long arms. They
explain that the crabs with dorsal markings are the wraiths of the
Taira warriors. Later on we shall introduce another legend relating to
these unfortunate ghosts, who seem never to tire of haunting the scene
of their defeat.

The Goblin of Oyeyama

In the reign of the Emperor Ichijo many dreadful stories were current
in Kyōto in regard to a demon that lived on Mount Oye. This demon could
assume many forms. Sometimes appearing as a human being, he would
steal into Kyōto, and leave many a home destitute of well-loved sons
and daughters. These young men and women he took back to his mountain
stronghold, and, sad to narrate, after making sport of them, he and
his goblin companions made a great feast and devoured these poor
young people. Even the sacred Court was not exempt from these awful
happenings, and one day Kimitaka lost his beautiful daughter. She had
been snatched away by the Goblin King, Shutendoji.

When this sad news reached the ears of the Emperor he called his
council together and consulted how they might slay this dreadful
creature. His ministers informed his Majesty that Raiko was a doughty
knight, and advised that he should be sent with certain companions on
this perilous but worthy adventure.

Raiko accordingly chose five companions and told them what had been
ordained, and how they were to set out upon an adventurous journey, and
finally to slay the King of the Goblins. He explained that subtlety
of action was most essential if they wished for success in their
enterprise, and that it would be well to go disguised as mountain
priests, and to carry their armour and weapons on their backs,
carefully concealed in unsuspicious-looking knapsacks. Before starting
upon their journey two of the knights went to pray at the temple of
Hachiman, the God of War, two at the shrine of Kwannon, the Goddess of
Mercy, and two at the temple of Gongen.

When these knights had prayed for a blessing upon their undertaking
they set out upon their journey, and in due time reached the province
of Tamba, and saw immediately in front of them Mount Oye. The Goblin
had certainly chosen the most formidable of mountains. Mighty rocks
and great dark forests obstructed their path in every direction, while
almost bottomless chasms appeared when least expected.

Just when these brave knights were beginning to feel just a little
disheartened, three old men suddenly appeared before them. At first
these newcomers were regarded with suspicion, but later on with the
utmost friendliness and thankfulness. These old men were none other
than the deities to whom the knights had prayed before setting out
upon their journey. The old men presented Raiko with a jar of magical
_saké_ called Shimben-Kidoku-Shu ("a cordial for men, but poison for
goblins"), advising him that he should by strategy get Shutendoji to
drink it, whereupon he would immediately become paralysed and prove
an easy victim for the final despatch. No sooner had these old men
given the magical _saké_ and proffered their valuable advice than a
miraculous light shone round them, and they vanished into the clouds.

Once again Raiko and his knights, much cheered by what had happened,
continued to ascend the mountain. Coming to a stream, they noticed a
beautiful woman washing a blood-stained garment in the running water.
She was weeping bitterly, and wiped away her tears with the long sleeve
of her _kimono_. Upon Raiko asking who she was, she informed him that
she was a princess, and one of the miserable captives of the Goblin
King. When she was told that it was none other than the great Raiko
who stood before her, and that he and his knights had come to kill the
vile creature of that mountain, she was overcome with joy, and finally
led the little band to a great palace of black iron, satisfying the
sentinels by telling them that her followers were poor mountain priests
who sought temporary shelter.

After passing through long corridors Raiko and his knights found
themselves in a mighty hall. At one end sat the awful Goblin King.
He was of gigantic stature, with bright red skin and a mass of white
hair. When Raiko meekly informed him who they were, the Goblin King,
concealing his mirth, bade them be seated and join the feast that
was about to be set before them. Thereupon he clapped his red hands
together, and immediately many beautiful damsels came running in with
an abundance of food and drink, and as Raiko watched these women he
knew that they had once lived in happy homes in Kyōto.

[Illustration: Raiko and the Enchanted Maiden.--46]

When the feast was in full progress Raiko took out the jar of magic
_saké_, and politely begged the Goblin King to try it. The monster,
without demur or suspicion, drank some of the _saké_, and found it
so good that he asked for a second cup. All the goblins partook of
the magic wine, and while they were drinking Raiko and his companions
danced.

The power of this magical drink soon began to work. The Goblin King
became drowsy, till finally he and his fellow goblins fell fast asleep.
Then Raiko sprang to his feet, and he and his knights rapidly donned
their armour and prepared for war. Once more the three deities appeared
before them, and said to Raiko: "We have tied the hands and feet of the
Demon fast, so you have nothing to fear. While your knights cut off his
limbs do you cut off his head: then kill the rest of the _oni_ (evil
spirits) and your work will be done." Then these divine beings suddenly
disappeared.

Raiko Slays the Goblin

Raiko and his knights, with their swords drawn, cautiously approached
the sleeping Goblin King. With a mighty sweep Raiko's weapon came
crashing down on the Goblin's neck. No sooner was the head severed
than it shot up into the air, and smoke and fire poured out from the
nostrils, scorching the valiant Raiko. Once more he struck out with his
sword, and this time the horrible head fell to the floor, and never
moved again. It was not long before these brave knights despatched the
Demon's followers also.

There was a joyful exit from the great iron palace. Raiko's five
knights carried the monster head of the Goblin King, and this grim
spectacle was followed by a company of happy maidens released at last
from their horrible confinement, and eager to walk once again in the
streets of Kyōto.

The Goblin Spider

Some time after the incident mentioned in the previous legend had
taken place the brave Raiko became seriously ill, and was obliged
to keep to his room. At about midnight a little boy always brought
him some medicine. This boy was unknown to Raiko, but as he kept so
many servants it did not at first awaken suspicion. Raiko grew worse
instead of better, and always worse immediately after he had taken the
medicine, so he began to think that some supernatural force was the
cause of his illness.

At last Raiko asked his head servant if he knew anything about the boy
who came to him at midnight. Neither the head servant nor any one else
seemed to know anything about him. By this time Raiko's suspicions were
fully awakened, and he determined to go carefully into the matter.

When the small boy came again at midnight, instead of taking the
medicine, Raiko threw the cup at his head, and drawing his sword
attempted to kill him. A sharp cry of pain rang through the room, but
as the boy was flying from the apartment he threw something at Raiko.
It spread outward into a huge white sticky web, which clung so tightly
to Raiko that he could hardly move. No sooner had he cut the web
through with his sword than another enveloped him. Raiko then called
for assistance, and his chief retainer met the miscreant in one of the
corridors and stopped his further progress with extended sword. The
Goblin threw a web over him too. When he at last managed to extricate
himself and was able to run into his master's room, he saw that Raiko
had also been the victim of the Goblin Spider.

The Goblin Spider was eventually discovered in a cave writhing with
pain, blood flowing from a sword-cut on the head. He was instantly
killed, and with his death there passed away the evil influence that
had caused Raiko's serious illness. From that hour the hero regained
his health and strength, and a sumptuous banquet was prepared in honour
of the happy event.

