DEITIES, THEMES, AND CONCEPTS
Norse Mythology
 Ægir’s prowess as a host is the final motif Odin reveals to the terrified King Geirröd in Grímnismál before beginning the list of names that leads to his epiphany. But Ægir was also a famous guest, according to Snorri. The frame story that he uses in the first sections of Skáldskaparmál begins with this introduc- tion of Ægir:
A man was named Ægir or Hlér; he lived on that island which is now called Hlér’s Island [modern Læssø in Denmark]. He had much magic knowledge. He made his way to Ásgard, but the æsir knew of his journey in advance. He was well received, but many things were done with illusions.
The similarities to Gylfaginning are remarkable, and they are only extended when Bragi, who is seated next to Ægir, begins to tell Ægir stories: the mythic narratives in Skáldskaparmál, beginning with the Thjazi-Idun-Skadi complex. Ægir asks questions after hearing this cycle, and more myths follow. The dia- logue between Ægir the questioner and Bragi the narrator continues for many pages in Skáldskaparmál and is embedded in many of the myths that are recounted. After a time, speakers are not identified, but the dialogue form is car- ried on throughout Skáldskaparmál, and Ægir reappears as the subject in one of the questions concerning kennings: Why is gold called “fire of the sea” or “fire of Ægir”? The answer is what was found in the prose header to Lokasenna: Gold was used to light Ægir’s hall when he entertained the æsir.
The beginning of Orkneyinga saga (The Saga of the Orkney Islanders) is some- times called Fundinn Noregr (Norway Found), and it is closely related to a section of Flateyjarbók called Hversu Noregr byggdisk (How Norway Was Settled). It begins with a king called Fornjót, who ruled in northern Norway. “Fornjót had three sons. One was named Hlér, whom we call Ægir, the second Logi, the third Kári.” Like ægir, hlér is a noun meaning “sea.” The noun logi means “fire,” and kári is listed among the thulur for “wind.” Thus Ægir as a personification of the sea would appear to have been regarded as one of the three elements in a genealog- ical tradition that presumably was localized in Norway.
See also Ægir’s Daughters; Fornjót; Rán
References and further reading: Matthias Tveitane, “Omkring det mytologiske
navnet Ægir ‘vannmannen,’” Acta Philologica Scandinavica 31 (1976): 81–95 (summary in English), argues that the name of the being Ægir, which he understands as “water-man,” was originally separate from the noun “mass of water, sea.” Francis P. Magoun treated some place-names, including the name of Ægir, in “Fi feldor and the Name of the Eider,” Namn och bygd 28 (1940): 91–114. Franz Rolf Schröder, “Die Göttin des Urmeeres und ihr männlicher Partner,” Beiträge zur Geschichte der deutschen Sprache und Literatur (Tübingen) 82 (1960): 221–264, is centered on Nerthus and Njörd but also included discussion of Rán and Ægir/Hlér. Margaret Clunies Ross, “Snorri Sturluson’s Use of the Norse Origin Legend of the Sons of Fornjótr in His Edda,” Arkiv för nordisk filologi 98 (1983): 47–66, analyzes Snorri’s under- standing of natural forces as giants.
ÆGIR’S DAUGHTERS
The waves of the sea; nine sisters, daughters of Ægir and Rán.
Ægir is the sea personified, and his daughters are the waves. The poet known only as Svein, perhaps an Icelander of the eleventh century, describes a wintry storm in which gusts of wind from the mountains riffle and tear apart Ægir’s daughters, that is, the waves. Helgakvida Hundingsbana I, stanza 29, calls a powerful wave that nearly overturns a ship Ægir’s daughter. In Skáldskaparmál, Snorri Sturluson says that Rán is Ægir’s wife and the mother of Ægir’s daugh- ters. Snorri lists their names twice, with a variation in the eighth name only: Himinglæfa (Transparent-on-top), Dúfa (Wave), Blódudhadda (Bloody-hair), Hefring (Lifting), Unn (Wave), Hrönn (Wave), Bylgja (Billow), Kára (Powerful) or Dröfn (Wave), and Kólga (Cool-wave). The only one of these names whose appro- priateness is not immediately apparent is “Bloody-hair,” which I take to refer to reddish foam atop a wave.
See also Ægir
ÆSIR
The gods; also the main group of gods, as opposed to the vanir.
The medieval Icelandic word æsir is a plural; the singular is áss, and a derived feminine form, ásynja (pl., ásynjur), means “goddess.” Etymologically, áss appears to be derived from an Indo-European root meaning “breath,” and this would suggest an association with life and life-giving forces. A dissenting ety- mology would understand the term as associated with sovereignty and “binding gods,” parallel to the terms bönd and höpt. The term is found a few times in early runic inscriptions, and the cognate is found in Old English os, “god, deity,” and in anses, “demigods,” a Latinized version of a word in Gothic, the language of the well-known Germanic tribe. The word áss, or its homonym, also means “beam” or “post,” and some scholars seek an association with wooden idols or the equivalent. The rune poems, which are relatively late, give áss or its equiv- alent as the name of the a-rune.
In medieval Icelandic the term æsir is the one most often found when the gods are being described as a group, in prose and in poetry. In Thrymskvida, for example, when it is revealed that Thor’s hammer has been stolen by the giant Thrym and that he will exchange it only for Freyja, the poet writes:
  
Then all the æsir were at an assembly,
And all the ásynjur in discussion. (stanza 14)
Often the term álfar, “elves,” is used as a parallel, probably because of the alliteration that the poetic form required, but also perhaps because of a funda- mental association between the two groups. As she describes the world crum- bling about them at Ragnarök, for example, the seeress of Völuspá asks: “What’s with the æsir, / what’s with the elves?” (stanza 48), a formula that is repeated in Thrymskvida, stanza 7. In the Ljódatal section of Hávamál, Odin boasts that he can discern the difference between æsir and álfar (stanza 159) and adds that the fifteenth song he has learned was chanted by the dwarf Thjódörir, before the doors of Delling: “He chanted strength for the æsir, / advancement for the álfar, / and mind for Hroptaty ́r [Odin]” (stanza 160). The formulaic association of æsir and álfar is also found in Grímnismál, Skírnismál, and Lokasenna.
Although the plural refers to all the gods, the singular seems to have a spe- cial association with Thor. Thus, when Thor tells Loki about the theft of the hammer early in Thrymskvida, he says: “The áss has had his hammer stolen” (stanza 2). Thor is called Ása-Thor (Thor of the æsir). No other god is described in this way, and it has been suggested that this extension of the name means that he was regarded as best of the æsir.
The most interesting use of the word æsir is that of Snorri Sturluson in the euhemerization project he set forth in the preface to his Edda and in the open- ing chapters of Ynglinga saga. Ásía, the Old Norse word for Asia, appeared to contain the word áss, although of course it does not, and Snorri used the sound similarity to suggest that the original meaning of æsir was “men of Asia.” Chap- ter 2 of Ynglina saga begins as follows:
To the east of Tanakvísl [the river Don] in Asia was known as Ásaland [land of the æsir] or Ása-heimr [world of the æsir], and the principle stronghold in the land they called Ásgard.
Because of this usage, one must take care when reading Snorri’s Edda. When King Gylfi resolves to set off for his encounter with High, Equally-high, and Third, it is because he is curious about the knowledge and power of the Ása-folk, which must refer to “Asians”; the intended euhemerism may even explain Snorri’s choice of “Ása-folk,” which clearly retains the root of Ásía, here instead of “æsir.” In the frame to Skáldskaparmál, however, he just refers to the inhab- itants of Ásgard as æsir, and there the ambiguity may be deliberate.
See also Æsir-Vanir War; Almáttki áss; Ása-Thor; Gods, Words for
References and further reading: Andreas Heusler, Die gelehrte Urgeschichte im altisländischen Schrifttum, Abhandlungen der Königlichen Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-Historische Klasse; [Jahrg.] 1908, Abh. 3 (Berlin, Verlag der Königlichenen Akademie der Wissenschaften, in Commission bei Georg Reimer, 1908). Waltraud Hunke, “Odins Geburt,” in Edda, Skalden, saga: Festschrift zum 70. Geburtstag von Felix Genzmer, ed. Hermann Schneider (Heidelberg: C. Winter, 1952), 68–71. Edgar Polomé, “L’étymologie du terme germanique *ansuz ‘dieu souverain,’” Études ger- maniques 8 (1953): 36–44. Albert Morey Sturtevant, “Regarding the Name Ása-∏órr,” Scandinavian Studies 15 (1953): 15–16.
ÆSIR-VANIR WAR
War fought at the beginning of time, leading by its truce to the incorporation of the æsir and vanir into a single unified group of gods.
We know the war from Völuspá and from Snorri’s somewhat varying descrip- tions in the Ynglinga saga of his Heimskringla and in the Skáldskaparmál of his Edda. The sequence in Völuspá of stanzas 21–24 refers to the first battle in the world, and in stanza 24 both the æsir and vanir are mentioned. The seeress is speaking of herself in the third person:
21. She remembers the battle of armies, the first one in the world, When Gullveig with spears they studded
And in the hall of Hár burned her;
Thrice burned, thrice born,
Often, unseldom, though she yet lives.
22. They called her Heid, where she came to [the?] houses,
a seeress very wise, she cast spells;
she performed seid where she could, she performed seid, in a trance, she was ever the joy of an evil woman.
23. Then all the powers went to the judgment seats
the very holy gods, and discussed this:
whether the æsir should pay a fine,
or all the gods should have tribute.
24. That was yet the battle of armies, the first one in the world. Odin let fly and shot into the army,
The shield wall of the fortress of the æsir was broken,
The battle-wise vanir knew how to tread the field.
I am uncertain about portions of the above translation, especially the second half of stanza 23. In stanza 21 and stanza 24, the term I have translated as “army” and “armies” is fólk, and although the word indeed means “army” in the older poetry, by the Middle Ages it also commonly had the meaning “people.” Thus, it is quite possible that the scribes of the Poetic Edda and a thirteenth-century audience could have understood the stanza as referring literally to a battle of peoples.
Although these stanzas are anything but clear, they seem to tell of a bat- tle precipitated by the entry of Gullveig or Heid among the æsir. They were unable to kill her with spears or fire, and she was a practitioner of seid, the ancient form of divination and of magic in general. Since Snorri says that Freyja brought seid to the æsir, many scholars have assumed that Gullveig/Heid is actually Freyja, one of the vanir, and that her corruption of the æsir precipitated the war. Gullveig appears to mean “Gold-drink” or pos- sibly “Gold-intoxication”; Heid means perhaps “Shiny.” Stanza 23 seems to have to do with an inability to reach a truce during a war, and understood thus it leads nicely into the battle of stanza 24. The move, however, from “æsir” to the inclusive “all the gods” could indicate a move toward a community involving æsir and vanir.
When Snorri tells about the war in Skáldskaparmál, it is as part of the much longer story of the origin of the mead of poetry, which Ægir has asked Bragi about. The beginning of this story, Bragi responds, is that the gods had been in conflict with that people (fólk) who were called the vanir, and they negotiated a truce settlement in which each side spat into a kettle. From the mingled spittle came Kvasir, and from him in turn came the mead of poetry, but that is another story.
Snorri devotes more attention to the war and its aftermath in Ynglinga saga. Here the story is set into the historical or pseudohistorical context of the æsir as Asians and the vanir as a people dwelling by the river Tanakvísl, or, as Snorri says it might be called in violation of every modern linguistic norm but in a per- fectly reasonable medieval linguistic jump, Vanakvísl. Snorri, in chapter 4, describes what looks like a real war. The story is as follows:
Odin went to war against the vanir, but they defended themselves and their land well, and neither side could gain the upper hand. They agreed on a settle- ment and exchanged hostages [here understood as men exchanged as pledges of good faith]. The vanir sent their most distinguished men, Njörd and Frey, and the æsir in exchange sent Hœnir, whom they declared to be a great leader, and Mímir, who was very wise. In response, the vanir sent Kvasir, who was also very wise. Hœnir proved to be unable of leadership without consulting Mímir, so the vanir, suspecting that they had been cheated, beheaded Mímir and sent the head to Odin. Odin preserved the head and it told him many hidden things. The æsir made Njörd and Frey into leaders of cult. Freyja, Njörd’s daughter, first taught seid to the æsir. Brother-sister incest, which had been common among the vanir, was banned among the æsir. Even if Freyja is not identical to Gullveig/Heid, the various versions seem to share the notion of a disruptive entry of persons into a people (Gullveig/Heid among the æsir, Hœnir and Mímir among the vanir) and the acquisition of tools for the acquisition of wisdom, seid in two accounts and the head of Mímir in one. Both of Snorri’s accounts place more emphasis on the settlement than on the war, and from Skáldskaparmál we learn that the tangible symbol of the truth, the mixed spittle, ultimately became one of the greatest tools for wisdom, namely the mead of poetry. Ynglinga saga also indicates that the most distin- guished of the vanir, Njörd and Frey, were fully incorporated into the æsir.
Since the vanir are fertility deities, the war has often been understood as the reflection of the overrunning of local fertility cults somewhere in the Germanic area by a more warlike cult, perhaps that of invading Indo-Europeans. But Georges Dumézil argued forcefully that the story of the war need be no more his- torical than any other myth: It is set before the emigration from the Middle East, and it is far more focused on the truce than on the details of any battles. The myth of the war between the æsir and vanir (perhaps better termed the “recon- ciliation of the æsir and vanir”?) explains symbolically how a religious system contains various kinds of deities with varying functions.
See also Hœnir; Mead of Poetry; Mímir; Seid
References and further reading: Dumézil published his ideas on the war in many
places, but the easiest of access is found in chapter 1 of his Gods of the Ancient Northmen, ed. Einar Haugen, Publications of the UCLA Center for the Study of Comparative Folklore and Mythology, 3 (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1973). A social reading drawing on Indo-European parallels is Jarich G. Oosten, The War of the Gods: The Social Code in Indo-European Mythology (London: Routledge, 1985). Those wishing to see how the arguments were constructed for the notion of warring cults may consult Karl Weinhold, “Über den Mythus vom Wanenkrieg,” Sitzungsberichte der köninglichen preussischen Akademie der Wissensa- haften zu Berlin, phil.-hist. Kl. 1890: 611–625, or H. W. Stubbs, “Troy, Ásgard, and Armageddon,” Folklore 70 (1959): 440–459. Torbjörg Östvold, “The War of the Æsir and the Vanir: A Myth of the Fall in Nordic Religion,” Temenos 5 (1969): 169–202, has not found favor.
ÁLFABLÓT
“Elf-sacrifice,” pagan ritual known from literary sources.
The Icelandic skald Sighvatr Thórdarson composed verses about his journey to Västergötland, Sweden, circa 1017, gathered under the title Austrfararvísur. Often the pagan Swedes refused hospitality, and in one verse this refusal is explicitly linked to the álfablót that is going on inside. The verse says that it was an old woman who denied entry, and that she was afraid of the wrath of Odin. This would appear to associate a cult of the elves explicitly with the gods. Kor- máks saga, chapter 22, has the prophetess Thórdís give advice to Thorvard, who was wounded in a duel with Kormák and seeks to be healed. He must get a bull slain by Kormák, pour its blood on a hill inhabited by elves, and prepare a feast for them out of the slaughtered meat. Although the word álfablót is not used, this too looks like a sacrifice to the elves. Certainly there is a vast difference between a ceremony held indoors, as in the Swedish álfablót mentioned by Sighvatr, and sacrificial acts undertaken in nature, as the thirteenth-century Kormáks saga suggests for tenth-century Iceland, and this difference appears to be greater than one would expect for regional variation. Since Sighvatr actually uses the term álfablót, and is something of an eyewitness, we should probably give his account precedence.
Property of Frey, presumably a residence.
The information on Álfheim is found in the second half of stanza 5 of Grímnis- mál, which begins the list of residences of the gods:
Álfheim the gods in ancient times Gave to Frey as a tooth-gift.
A tooth-gift was given when a child cut its first tooth, that is, when it was around a year old. The notion of Frey as an infant among the æsir contradicts the myth of the Æsir-Vanir War, in which Frey joined the æsir as a hostage (human pledge) and at the time was a distinguished man.
Perhaps for this reason, in Gylfaginning Snorri has a different account of Álfheim: It is, as the name suggests, the abode of the elves—or more precisely, the light-elves; the dark-elves (only Snorri has this distinction) live below the earth. No connection between Frey and the elves is known from other sources.
Álfheimar (plural) was also according to medieval historiography the name of the geographic district between the mouths of the Göta and Glom (Norse Raum) rivers in the coastal border districts between Sweden and Norway. The Sögubrot af fornkonungum reports that the people who lived there were fairer than others, which could indicate an association with the elves, but the name of the district probably is derived from a word meaning a gravel layer under a field.
 ALFÖDR (ALL-FATHER)
Odin name, found in skaldic and eddic poetry and frequent in the Gylfaginning in Snorri’s Edda.
In Gylfaginning the very first question put by Gylfi/Gangleri is “Who is the fore- most or eldest of all the gods?” Hár answers, “That one is called Alfödr in our lan- guage, but in Old Ásgard he had twelve names.” The names listed are Odin names, but Odin is not explicitly identified as Alfödr until later in Gylfaginning. Later Snorri writes: “And he may be called Alfödr because he is the father of all the gods and of men and of all that which was done by him and his power. The earth was his daughter and his wife. From her he got his first son, Ása-Thor.” Although Snorri seems to use Alfödr and Odin interchangeably (and some manuscripts have Alfödr where others have Odin), it is not until he has formally introduced Odin as the first in his catalog of æsir that the identification of Odin and Alfödr is made explicitly.
Odin is the foremost and eldest of the æsir; he rules all things, and as powerful as the other gods are, they serve him as children do a father. . . . Odin is called Alfödr.
The form födr for “father” appears to be archaic. It is also found in the Odin names Herfödr and Valfödr.
See also Odin
References and further reading: Walter Baetke discussed Snorri’s use of the name
Alfödr in his Die Götterlehre der Snorra-Edda, Berichte über die Verhand- lungen der sächischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig, phil.-hist. Kl., 97:3 (Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1950). According to Baetke, the obvious Christ- ian analogue to the concept of an all-father has to do with Snorri’s attempt to describe the natural religion of his pagan forebears, which Snorri assumes would have tended toward monotheism. Thus Odin, only one of many gods in the mythology itself, was in Baetke’s view promoted to a leading position in Snorri’s description of it.
ALMÁTTKI ÁSS
“All-powerful deity” of unknown identity.
The expression is found in oaths and is given its fullest expression in Land- námabók (in chapter 268 in the Hauksbók version). The passage describes the paganism that obtained in Iceland in the early days of the settlement. Every pagan temple should have a ring, and before entering into legal proceedings, each man should swear an oath on that ring:
I attest that I make an oath on the ring, a legal oath: May Frey and Njörd and the almáttki áss help me in this case as I prosecute or defend or bring wit- nesses or verdicts or judgments, as I know how to do most rightly or truly or procedurally correctly, and dispatch all legal pleadings which fall to me, while I am at the assembly.
I cite the full passage to counteract the impression given by some modern writers that the oath served for general purposes; the author of this recension of Landnámabók states quite clearly that it is a legal oath.
No certainty as to the identity of the almáttki áss has been reached. An interpretation based purely on the mythology would lead to Odin, the all-father and most powerful of the æsir. A consideration of the role of Thor around the time of the conversion to Christianity and his lengthened name Ása-Thor would lead easily to him. A focus on the ring might lead to Ull, for in Atlakvida, stanza 30, Gudún reminds Atli that he has sworn oaths on the ring of Ull. And in his Lexikon der germanischen Mythologie, Rudolf Simek even plays with the idea of Ty ́r, which might be possible if one attempted a purely historical reading.
Because Frey and Njörd are vanir, the word áss in the formula appears to point specifically away from the vanir. But we must be cautious, as the entire passage in question is the product of a medieval Christian author who was demonstrably far more interested in his ancestors’ Christian background than in their pagan background. Perhaps he even meant the “almighty áss” to be a noble pagan anticipation of the new religion that was to come.
References and further reading: Hermann Pálsson, “Áss hinn almáttki,” Skírnir 130 (1956): 187–192 (in Icelandic; argues for Ull). Jakob Jóh. Smári, “Áss hinn almáttki,” Skírnir 110 (1936): 161–163 (in Icelandic; argues for a nameless creator). Henry L. Tapp, “Hinn almáttki áss—Thor or Odin?” Journal of English and Germanic Philology 55 (1956): 85–89. Gabriel Turville-Petre, “The Cult of Odin in Iceland,” in his Nine Norse Studies, Viking Society Text Series, 5 (London: Viking Society; University College London, 1972), 1–19.
ALVÍSSMÁL
Eddic poem, “The Words of All-wise.”
Found only in Codex Regius of the Poetic Edda, the poem is situated between Völundarkvida and Helgakvida Hundingsbana I, the first of the heroic poems in the manuscript. Alvíssmál may be the last of the poems in the mythological sec- tion because it has a dwarf as a main character; Völundarkvida has an elf, and the two together may therefore represent a transitional section from poems of gods to poems of men.
Alvíssmál consists of 35 stanzas of dialogue in the meter usually used for dia- logue, ljóƒaháttr. In the first stanzas one of the speakers announces that he has come for a bride, and when challenged about his identity says, “I am named Alvíss [All-wise], / I live down under the earth, / I have my dwelling under a stone.” In stanza 6 the other speaker, the father of the bride, identifies himself as Vingthór, the son of Sídgrani; that is, Thor, the son of Odin. Thor will only give up the girl, whose troth was, he says, given while he was away (stanza 4), if the dwarf will tell him everything he wishes to know. What follows is a series of 13 questions. Each of them begins with the formula “Tell me that, Alvíss, / —all the fates of men / I expect that you know, dwarf.” The questions themselves concern vocabulary: What is something called, by which Thor seems to desire a list of synonyms. In his responses Alvíss provides these synonyms according to the races or groups of beings in the mythology. The groups are not always quite the same, but humans, gods, and giants are constants, and vanir (as opposed to the gods in general), elves, dwarfs, and the dead occur frequently. Generally the everyday word is assigned to humans and the other terms are from the poetic vocabulary. Frequently the words assigned to the gods have an elegant feel, while those assigned to the giants feel heavy or clumsy, although admittedly such feelings are to a certain extent subjective.
The categories Thor requests are as follows: earth, heaven, moon, sun, clouds, wind, calm, sea, fire, wood, night, seed, and ale. These categories and the order in which they appear can hardly be arbitrary. The first five are cosmic, and they are presented in the order in which they appear in the creation story. Sea and fire will destroy the cosmos at Ragnarök, wood could represent Yggdrasil, the world tree, and beer, which comes from grain that grows out of seeds, is asso- ciated with Odin and wisdom. At the equivalent point in an Odinic wisdom con- test there would be an epiphany, as in Grímnismál or Vafthrúdnismál, leading to the death of the one contending in wisdom with the god, and here something similar happens: Night, the eleventh category, has ended. Thor has the last word, and in his final half-stanza he uses the “magic” meter galdralag. “In one breast / I never saw / more ancient wisdom; / with great deceits / I declare you trapped: / you are “dayed out,” dwarf, / now the sun shines in the hall.” We surmise that the ray of sunlight shatters the dwarf or turns him to stone, as in many dwarf legends; a giantess is turned to stone under precisely the same circumstances in a heroic eddic peom, Helgakvida Hjörvardssonar.
Neither Thor nor dwarfs are ordinarily known for skill at verbal dueling, and despite tantalizing hints associating some dwarfs with wisdom, most have none. This and other evidence has been used to propose a late origin for the poem. But Thor is responsible for protecting his females, and thus the result of the action of the poem is appropriate, even if its players strike us as misplaced.
References and further reading: A good study of the language of the poem is Lennart Moberg, “The Language of Alvíssmál,” Saga-Book of the Viking Soci- ety 18 (1973): 299–323. Calvert Watkins, “Language of Gods and Language of Men: Remarks on Some Indo-European Metalinguistic Traditions,” in Myth and Law among the Indo-Europeans: Studies in Indo-European Comparative
  
Norse Mythology
 Mythology, ed. Jaan Puhvel (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of Califor- nia Press, 1970), 1–17, provides a broader context. The situation of the frame, Thor protecting his daughter from a misalliance, is illuminated in Margaret Clunies Ross, “∏órr’s Honour,” in Studien zum Altgermanischen: Festschrift für Heinrich Beck, ed. Heiko Uecker (Berlin and New York: W. de Gruyter, 1994), 48–76.
ANDHRÍMNIR (SOOTY-IN-FRONT)
Cook at Valhöll.
The key passage is stanza 18 of Grímnismál. Andhrímnir in Eldhrímnir
Has Sæhrímnir boiled.
In Gylfaginning Snorri understands the passage as a cook (Andhrímnir) cooking pork (the pig Sæhrímnir) in a huge pot (Eldhrímnir), and indeed the rest of this stanza seems to call Sæhrímnir the best of pork and refers to the myste- rious nourishment of the einherjar. All three of the names are joined by the ele- ment hrímnir, which is derived from the word for soot on a cookpot. The element And- could refer to (or could have been understood by Snorri as refer- ring to) the front of the cook, who would be facing the cookpot as he worked his culinary magic.
See also Eldhrímnir; Sæhrímnir
ANDLANG
The second of three heavens in the cosmology of Snorri’s Gylfaginning.
No other text refers to this place or to a second heaven, so it may be Snorri’s invention. The name appears to mean “stretched out” but might conceivably derive from a longer form meaning “spiritual heaven.”
See also Vídbláinn
ANDVARI (CAREFUL)
Dwarf from whom Loki and the gods extract gold to pay compensation for their killing of Otr, the son of Hreidmar.
The story is told in Snorri’s Skáldskaparmál, in the prose header and opening stanzas of Reginsmál in the Poetic Edda, and in Völsunga saga. The gods involved are Odin, Hœnir, and Loki. Loki kills Otr (“Otter,” who had in fact taken the form of an otter), and Hreidmar demands compensation. Using Rán’s  net, Loki captures Andvari, who has been swimming about in the form of a pike, and extracts from him all his gold, right down to a ring the dwarf wishes to keep. When Loki insists on having it anyway, the dwarf curses it, saying that it will lead to death and discord. So it does.
Andvari is also mentioned in the catalog of dwarfs in Völuspá and in the thulur. The thulur also include the word as a noun for “fish.”
See also Dwarfs
ANGRBODA (SHE-WHO-OFFERS-SORROW)
Giantess mate of Loki and mother of monsters.
The name is found only once in poetry, in Hyndluljód, stanza 40, a part of the “Short Völuspá.”
Loki sired the wolf on Angrboda,
and got Sleipnir on Svadilfari;
the witch alone seemed most evil
the one that came from the brother of Byleipt.
Snorri makes Angrboda, “a giantess in Jötunheimar,” the mother of three monsters: the Fenrir wolf; Jörmungand, that is, the Midgard serpent; and Hel. This raises the possibility that the witch in lines 3–4 of the stanza quoted above from Hyndluljód may be Hel.
See also Fenrir; Hel; Loki; Midgard Serpent
ÁRVAK AND ALSVIN (EARLY-AWAKE AND VERY-SWIFT)
Horses that pull the sun.
Grímnismál, stanza 37, is the main source:
Árvak and Alsvin, they should up from here, The bold ones, pull the sun;
And under their traces the blithe powers, The æsir, hid “iron cold.”
The names of the horses are bound by alliteration, and they also occur as a couple on the other occasion when they appear in verse. This is in Sigrdrífumál, in a mysterious part of the poem introduced by a stanza saying that Mím’s head spoke. The very next stanza, number 15, is where the horses appear:
On a shield shall be carved, the one which stands before the shining god, On the ears of Árvak and on the hoof of Alsvin,
  
                                          This engraved stone found in Havor, Gotland, might be an unusual depiction of the horses that pull the sun, Árvak and Alsvin. (The Art Archive/Historiska Museet Stockholm/Dagli Orti) On that wheel, which turns itself under the riding of Rungnir, On Sleipnir’s teeth and on the springs of a sled.
The list goes on, and it becomes no more edifying.
Snorri paraphrases the stanza from Grímnismál in his Gylfaginning, but, rather uncharacteristically, he has nothing to add about the horses. He does, however, expand the “iron cold” (ísarn kól) into wind-driven bellows called “Ísarnkól.”
See also Sól
ÁSA-THOR (THOR-OF-THE-ÆSIR)
Name for Thor.
This name is found in Hárbardsljód, stanza 52, and frequently in Snorri’s Edda. Although it is sometimes used in cases where Thor’s might is held up to ques- tion (e.g., in the Útgarda-Loki story), it may be going a bit far to regard the name as ironic.
References and further reading: Albert Morey Sturtevant, “Regarding the Name Ása-∏órr,” Scandinavian Studies 15 (1953): 15–16.
ÁS-BRÚ (ÆSIR-BRIDGE)
Alternate name for Bilröst, according to Snorri Sturluson in Gylfaginning. He cites Grímnismál, stanza 29, which may, however, use the word as a common noun rather than as a name.
See also Bilröst
ÁSGARD (ENCLOSURE-OF-THE-ÆSIR)
The abode of the gods.
The name is found in eddic poetry, in Snorri’s Edda, and, perhaps most interest- ingly, in a fragment of a poem about Thor composed by the late-tenth-century skald Thorbjörn dísarskáld, who was one of two skalds to leave us poems addressed to Thor, the only such verse we know of. What Thorbjörn said was “Thor has defended Ásgard and Ygg’s [Odin’s] people [the gods] with strength.” The noun -gard, “yard,” is used of the domains of the major groups in the mythology: Ásgard for the gods, Midgard (Central-enclosure) for humans, and Útgardar (Outer-enclosures) for the jötnar (the last, however, is found only in connection with Útgarda-Loki). Within Ásgard was Valhöll.
What makes Ásgard an enclosure is the wall around it, which an elaborate story in Gylfaginning seems to address. The gods had established Midgard and had built Valhöll when a builder came to them and offered to build a fortress so secure that giants could not get through it. He offered to do the job in a year and a half against a payment of Freyja, the sun, and the moon. The gods thought they had cut a great deal when they got him to agree to do the job within half a year with only the help of his horse Svadilfari. They were mistaken, and when three days were left it appeared all but certain that the wall would be completed. The gods blamed Loki and threatened him. Loki changed himself into a mare and dis- tracted Svadilfari. The wall was never completed, and when Thor returned he killed the giant builder. Loki subsequently gave birth to Sleipnir.
References and further reading: The medieval and folklore analogues to the story of the construction of the wall were long ago pointed out by C. W. von Sydow, “Studier i Finnsägnen och besläktade byggmästarsägner,” Fataburen, 1907: 65–78, 199–218; and 1908: 19–27; Lotte Motz’s discussion, “Snorri’s Story of the Cheated Mason and Its Folklore Parallels,” Maal og minne, 1977: 115–122, adds little. Joseph Harris, “The Masterbuilder Story in Snorri’s Edda and Two Sagas,” Arkiv för nordisk filologi 91 (1976): 66–101, argues that Snorri created the story in an attempt to clarify Völuspá, stanzas 25–26. His source would have been an oral legend, retained in two of the Sagas of Icelanders, Eyrbyggja saga and Heidarvíga saga, about two berserks who build a road; this legend was in turn based on the international migratory legend von Sydow had dis- cussed. The argument is quite plausible, but it was disputed by Ursula Dronke, “Völuspá and Satiric Tradition,” Annali: Sezione germanica: Studi nederlandesi, studi nordici 77 (1979): 57–86, who postulated a lost Lay of Svadilfari as the source of Völuspá, stanzas 25–26.
ASK (ASH-TREE) AND EMBLA
First humans.
The story of the creation of humans is found in Völuspá, stanzas 17–18, and in Snorri’s Gylfaginning. According to Völuspá, Ask (the first human man) and Embla (the first human woman) were found on shore, capable of little and fate- less. Odin, Hœnir, and Lódur endowed them with the various qualities they needed to live. Odin gave breath or spirit, Hœnir gave mental faculties or voice, and Lódur gave blood, ruddiness, or vital warmth and good coloring. Snorri adds some details and changes others. The creator gods, according to Snorri, are the sons of Bor (elsewhere Bur)—Odin, Vili, and Vé—who find two pieces of wood on the seashore and fashion them into humans. One of Bor’s sons gives spirit and life; the second, mind and movement; the third, appearance, speech, hearing, and vision. The sons of Bor also gave these vivified pieces of wood clothing and their names, Ask and Embla, and from them descend the races of mankind.
In Völuspá, the stanzas about Ask and Embla follow the catalog of dwarfs, and it is quite possible that stanza 10, which refers to the dwarfs’ making of human forms out of the earth, may be involved. In this scenario, the dwarfs would have formed humans, but the gods would have endowed them with life.
Although Ask clearly means “Ash tree,” the meaning of Embla is uncertain. “Elm tree” is one possibility, but it encounters serious linguistic obstacles. The other possibility usually offered is “vine,” and in connection with this option comes the further suggestion of a relationship between human sexual congress and the turning of a hardwood such as ash into a soft wood to make fire.
See also Hœnir
References and further reading: The possible role of the dwarfs in the creation of
Ask and Embla is argued forcefully in Gro Steinsland, “Antrogonimyten i Voluspá: En tekst- og tradisjonskritisk analyse,” Arkiv för nordisk filologi 98 (1983): 80–107. For Embla as “vine” and the hardwood/softwood hypothesis, see Hans Sperber, “Embla,” Beiträge zur Geschichte der deutschen Sprache und Literatur 36 (1910): 219–222.
ATLA
One of nine giant mothers, perhaps of Heimdall, listed in Hyndluljód, stanza 37 (part of the “Short Völuspá”).
See also Heimdall; Hyndluljód
References and further reading: Lotte Motz, “Giantesses and Their Names,” Früh-
mittelalterliche Studien 15 (1981): 495–511.
AUDHUMLA
The proto-cow, involved in the origin of the races of gods and giants.
Although the name is found among the thulur for “cow,” Audhumla’s mytho- logical role is found only in Snorri’s Gylfaginning. Snorri says that Audhumla emerged from the drips of rime just after Ymir was formed, and that four streams of milk ran from her udders and nourished Ymir. She in turn licked salt blocks, and from these there emerged in three days Búri, the first of the æsir.
Although cows are not uncommon in creation stories from around the world, what is most striking about Audhumla is that she unites the two groups of warring groups in the mythology, by nourishing Ymir, ancestor of all the giants, and bringing into the light Búri, progenitor of the æsir. The presumed ety- mology of her name, “hornless cow rich in milk,” is of no help in interpreting her mythological role.
See also Ymir
References and further reading: On the etymology, see Adolf Noreen, “Urkon
Audhumla och några hennes språkliga släktningar,” Namn och bygd 6 (1918): 169–172. AURBODA (GRAVEL-OFFERER)
Giantess, mother of Gerd, Frey’s wife.
The relevant source is Hyndluljód, stanza 30, lines 5–8:
Frey possessed Gerd, she was the daughter of Gymir [corrected from Geymir]
Of the race of giants, and of Aurboda.
In Gylfaginning Snorri repeated this information.
Stanza 38 of Fjölsvinnsmál, which is stanza 54 in the poem editors create out of Grógald and Fjölsvinnsmál and which they call Svipdagsmál, also men- tions an Aurboda. She occurs in a list of nine maidens who sit at the knees of Menglöd. Although Menglöd is a giantess, these are not giantess names—one, indeed, is Eir, an ásynja according to Snorri, and the others are adjectives like bright, blithe, and fair. I doubt that we are dealing with the same Aurboda in both cases.
See also Frey, Gerd
AURGELMIR (MUD-YELLER)
Primeval giant.
In Vafthrúdnismál Odin asks Vafthrúdnir who was the oldest of the æsir or kin of Ymir. Vafthrúdnir says Bergelmir was born many years before the earth was formed; his father was Thrúdgelmir and his grandfather Aurgelmir. Odin now asks (stanza 30), whence Aurgelmir first came among the sons of the jötnar. The giant responds:
From the Élivágar spurted poison drops, Thus it grew, until a giant emerged.
Odin now asks how that giant got children, since he had no pleasure of giantesses. Vafthrúdnir responds in stanza 33:
Under an arm of the frost giant, they say, grew A maiden and lad together;
A leg got on a leg of the wise [or fruitful] giant A six-headed son.
Snorri quotes these verses but says that Aurgelmir was the name the frost giants used for Ymir. Since that would be unique, we must again assume that Snorri was systematizing, although it is also true that the hermaphroditic birthing process fits better etymologically with Ymir (whose name has to do with doubling) than with Aurgelmir.
See also Bergelmir; Thrúdgelmir; Ymir
AURVANDIL
Giant (?) whose toe was made into a star by Thor; husband of Gróa.
According to Snorri’s account of Thor’s duel with Hrungnir in Skáldskaparmál, Thor was visited by the seeress Gróa, who sang charms over him and thereby loosened the whetstone that was lodged in Thor’s head after the duel.
And when Thor learned that and thought it likely that the whetstone would be removed, then he wanted to repay Gróa for her cure and make her happy. He told her that he had been wading from the north across the Élivágar and had car- ried Aurvandil on his back in a basket out of Jötunheimar, and a sign of it was that one of Aurvandil’s toes had stuck out of the basket and frozen, and Thor broke it off and cast it into the sky and made of it that star which is called Aur- vandil’s Toe. Thor said that it would not be long before Aurvandil would come home, and Gróa became so happy that she forgot the charms and the whetstone grew no looser.
Although the etymology of the name is unknown, it is cognate with Old English earendel, “dawn, ray of light,” so there may be a Germanic myth here, despite the absence of Aurvandil from the Norse poetic corpus. Thor also made stars out of Thjazi’s eyes, and in my view we should read these acts as his con- tribution to cosmogony, an area in which he is otherwise absent.
References and further reading: Rudolf Much, “Aurvandils tá,” Altschlesien 5 (1934): 387–388, speculates on the star that Aurvandil’s toe may represent.
BALDR
God, member of the æsir group, killed by his blind half brother Höd, buried in a solemn funeral, and left in the world of the dead when an attempt to retrieve him fails.
The death of Baldr is one of the most important moments in the mythology. Parts of the story are alluded to in various skaldic poems; much of it is told in the Codex Regius version of Völuspá, and Snorri gives a full version in Gylfagin- ning, using a probably oral version of Völuspá and other sources. According to Snorri, Baldr is the second son of Odin, after Thor, and “about him there is good to report; he is the best, and all praise him; he is so fair of face and bright that he seems to shine, and one plant is so white that it is compared to Baldr’s brows; that is the whitest of all plants, and from it you can note his beauty, both of hair and of face; he is the wisest of the æsir and the most eloquent, and the most merciful, but that nature accompanies him, that none of his judgments stands. He lives where it is called Breidablik; that is in heaven; in that place nothing can be nothing impure.” A few pages later Snorri reports that Forseti is the son of Baldr and Nanna Nepsdóttir. Later in the Gylfaginning he tells about Baldr’s death and its aftermath, and these stories take up about 10 percent of the entire Gylfaginning.
Baldr’s death actually comprises several constituent parts, and Snorri is the first to combine them all in one fluid narrative, even if Völuspá, a version of which he clearly had before him, tells most of the story. These parts may con- veniently be divided as follows: Baldr’s death, his funeral, the attempted revival, and vengeance for him.
The story of Baldr’s death and the attempted revival are intertwined, by Snorri at least. It begins, according to him, with Baldr suffering disquieting dreams, presumably that he may be injured or killed. Frigg elicits an oath not to harm him from all things, and thereafter the æsir take sport in attacking him with weapons and stones, and it seems an accomplishment to them that he is unhurt. Loki is displeased that Baldr is unhurt. He takes the form of a woman, goes to Frigg, and asks whether anything can harm Baldr. Frigg responds that she took oaths from everything except mistletoe, which seemed too young. Loki gets some mistletoe, fashions a spear from it, and heads to the assembly. There he sees Baldr’s blind half brother, Höd, not participating in the sport. He gives the mistle- toe spear to Höd, who casts it at Baldr. It pierces Baldr, and he falls dead to the earth. “The greatest misfortune among gods and men was done,” says Snorri.
The gods are stricken, and no vengeance can be taken on the spot because it is a place of sanctuary. Frigg asks for a volunteer to go to Hel to try to retrieve Baldr. Hermód, another son (or a servant) of Odin volunteers. Borrowing Sleip- nir, he travels nine nights until he comes to the Gjallar bridge (Gjallarbrú, the bridge between earth and the underworld), where he is challenged by the maiden Módgud. She tells him that the way to Hel is down and north. He rides on, comes to Hel, and sees that Baldr is in the high seat (the seat of honor) in her hall. Hel agrees to release Baldr if all things, living and dead, will weep for him. Bearing tokens from the underworld, Hermód returns to the land of the living. Emissaries are sent to request that everything weep for Baldr, and just when the attempt appears to have succeeded, they come upon an old lady who calls her- self Thökk (Thanks). She speaks a verse: “Thökk will weep / dry tears / about Baldr’s funeral; / I had no use for Karl’s son, / alive or dead; / let Hel keep what she has.” People think, Snorri explains, that this old lady who kept Baldr with Hel was Loki. While Hermód was undertaking his journey, according to Snorri, Baldr’s funeral took place. Snorri was probably following the skald Úlf Uggason’s Hús- drápa here, a poem that describes the rich carved decorations in the newly built hall of Óláf pái (Peacock) from around 1185 or so in western Iceland. Here is what Húsdrápa says about the funeral:
The battle-wise Frey rides on a boar, bristled with gold, first to the pyre of the son of Odin, and leads armies. The exceedingly widely famous Hropta-Ty ́r [Odin] rides to the pyre of his son. There I perceive valkyries and ravens accom- pany the wise victory-tree [man; here Odin] to the blood of the holy corpse. Thus [the hall] is adorned from within with things remembered. The excellent Heimdall rides a horse to that pyre that the gods had built for the fallen son of the very wise tester of the raven [Odin]. The very powerful Hild of the moun- tains [giantess] caused the sea-Sleipnir [ship] to trudge forward; but the wielders of the helmet flames of Hropt [Odin] felled her mount.
Snorri has more detail. He adds several gods to the list of those who attended, and he makes sense out of the stanza with the giantess in it by stating that the funeral ship could not be launched and that the gods therefore sent to Jötunheimar for that ogress who was called Hyrrokkin. “She arrived riding a wolf with poisonous snakes for reins, and when she dismounted, Odin called to four berserks to look after the horse, and they could not hold it unless they killed it. Then Hyrrokkin went to the prow of the ship and shot it forward at the first try so that sparks leapt out of the runners and all the lands shook.” Thor was enraged and would have killed her had the gods not pleaded for amnesty for her. Thor kicked a little dwarf named Lit into the fire, and Nanna died of grief and was put on the pyre with Baldr. The ring Draupnir and Baldr’s horse were also burned with him.
The vengeance sequence comprises two parts. The first, regarding which Snorri is silent in Gylfaginning, is told in Völuspá: “Baldr’s brother was / quickly born; / that son of Odin / killed when he was one night old.” In Skáldskaparmál, Snorri reports that kennings for Váli include “enemy of Höd and his killer.” Vengeance is also taken on Loki, and here Snorri has a very detailed narrative (the prose following Lokasenna in the Poetic Edda tells much the same story but says that the gods were taking vengeance for Loki’s reviling of them). Loki runs off to a mountain and sequesters himself in a house with four doors out of which he peers to watch for the æsir’s attack. Frequently changing himself into a salmon, he anticipates the strategy of the æsir and makes a net but burns it and leaps into the river as they approach. Seeing the pattern in the ashes, Kvasir understands the potential it represents, and the æsir pursue Loki with a net. Twice he evades them, but on the third try he attempts a leap over the net and Thor grabs him by the tail, which is why salmon to this day are thin by the tail. The æsir take Loki to a cave, where they bind him to the rock. They change one of his sons into a wolf and have it tear the other to pieces. They suspend a poi- sonous snake over him, dripping venom. His wife Sigyn catches the venom in a pot, but when she goes to empty it the venom falls onto his face, and his writhings cause earthquakes.
Saxo Grammaticus has a rather different story of Baldr’s death and the after- math. Høtherus, the foster son of King Gevarus, and Balderus, the son of Othi- nus and a demigod, have both fallen in love with Nanna. Høtherus acquires a special sword and a magic ring. Nanna refuses Balderus on the grounds that demigods and humans are incompatible. Høtherus and an ally confront Balderus and the gods in a sea battle and gain victory when Høtherus slices the handle off Thor’s hammer, the gods’ major weapon, with his magic sword.
Høtherus marries Nanna. In a subsequent battle Balderus defeats him. Balderus is plagued by dreams of his desired Nanna. Høtherus is now chosen king of the Danes, but in his absence the Danes vote again, and this time they choose Balderus. In a third battle Høtherus is put to flight. In their final battle he wounds Balderus. Balderus dreams of Proserpina (as Saxo calls her, using the Roman name for the Greek Persephone, who like Hel presided over the under- world), dies, and is buried in a mound.
The story now turns to vengeance. A sorcerer advises Othinus that he must seduce Rinda, the daughter of the king of the Rutenians. After three failed attempts, first disguised as a warrior, then as a smith, and then as a knight, Oth- inus returns a fourth time, disguised as a woman, and becomes a serving maid to the princess. When Rinda falls sick, Othinus arranges for her to be tied down so that she can be given some medicine. He rapes her, and she bears Bous, who kills Høtherus.
These stories are indeed quite different, but there are important similarities that go beyond Höd killing Baldr and having vengeance taken on him. Dreams are important in both versions, as is a magic weapon. The goddess of the dead plays a role in each. The rape of Rinda is paralleled in medieval Icelandic tradi- tion in a skaldic stanza that states that Odin used the magic seid on Rind, the mother of Váli. The differences in the versions may reflect variants in medieval Icelandic oral tradition, since Saxo learned from Icelanders, but he may also be passing along some genuine Danish traditions.
The story has led to many attempts at interpretation, some of them rather fanciful. The mistletoe remains unexplained, despite Sir James Frazer’s attempt to build up a grand theory around it. In fact, the story may have far less to do with the fertility exemplified by various gods who die (in the fall) and are reborn (in the spring) than it does with initiation into a hypothetical cult of Odin. Thus Höd’s name seems to have meant “battle,” and his blindness intensifies Odin’s sacrifice of a single eye. Gautreks saga contains a sham sacrifice to Odin that turns real. When Starkad throws at King Víkar a reed that has been provided to him by another person, the reed turns into a spear and kills the king.
However, analysis of the Baldr story as Odinic ritual runs up against the fact that in Völuspá Baldr’s death leads directly to Ragnarök (and the victory of Høtherus over all the gods in Saxo may be analogous). For Snorri, too, Baldr’s death was a disaster that led to Ragnarök. I understand the story as the mythic reflection of a basic social problem, namely, the fact that a society that used blood feud to resolve disputes—as medieval and presumably saga Iceland did— could not deal with a killing within a family. Simply by requiring a counterat- tack against the family of the killer, Höd’s killing of Baldr puts Odin in an impossible situation. He turns outside the kin group to sire the avenger Váli/Bous, but that is no solution, since it simply displaces the problem of brother killing brother. The Old English epic poem Beowulf has a story that looks cognate, in which one brother, Hædcyn (Höd) mistakenly kills another, Herebeald (Baldr?). Hredel, the father, dies of grief.
References and further reading: A comparison of the versions of the story in the Icelandic sources and Saxo, arguing essential similarity, is Margaret Clunies Ross, “Mythic Narrative in Saxo Grammaticus and Snorri Sturluson,” in the volume Saxo Grammaticus: Tra storiografia e letteratura: Bevagna, 27–29 settembre 1990 (Rome: Editrice “Il Calamo,” 1992), 47–59. Sir James Frazer’s reading of the Baldr myth—still a classic of “armchair anthropology”—may be studied in his “Balder the Beautiful,” in The Golden Bough: A Study in Magic and Religion, 3rd ed., 2 vols. (New York: St. Martin’s Press: 1990 [1890]), part 7; see also John Stanley Martin, “Baldr’s Death and The Golden Bough,” in Iceland and the Medieval World: Studies in Honour of Ian Maxwell, ed. Gabriel Turville-Petre and John Stanley Martin (Victoria, Australia: The Orga- nizing Committee for Publishing a Volume in Honour of Professor Maxwell, 1974), 26–32. My reading of the Baldr myth is in my Murder and Vengeance among the Gods: Baldr in Scandinavian Mythology, FF Communications, 277 (Helsinki: Societas Scientiarum Fennica, 1997); see also my “Interpreting Baldr, the Dying God,” in Australian Academy of the Humanities Proceed- ings, 1993: 155–173 (also in Old Norse Studies in the New World, ed. Judy Quinn, Geraldine Barnes, and Margaret Clunies Ross [Sydney: University of Sydney, 1994], 14–25). On blood feud, see William Ian Miller, Bloodtaking and Peacemaking: Feud, Law, and Society in Saga Iceland (Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 1990), and on its general application to the mythology see my “Blood Feud and Scandinavian Mythology,” Alvíssmál 4 (1994): 51–68. In her Prolonged Echoes: Old Norse Myths in Medieval Ice- landic Society, vol. 1: The Myths (Odense: Odense University Press, 1994), Margaret Clunies Ross stresses the dynastic implications of the story: Baldr is Odin’s legitimate heir, and his death brings about a crisis of succession.
  
