Animism

All mythological systems spring from the same fundamental basis.  The
gods are the children of reverence and necessity.  But their genealogy
stretches still farther back.  Savage man, unable to distinguish
between the animate and inanimate, imagines every surrounding object to
be, like himself, instinct with life.  Trees, the winds, the river
(which he names "the Long Person"), all possess life and consciousness
in his eyes.  The trees moan and rustle, therefore they speak, or are,
perchance, the dwelling-place of powerful spirits.  The winds are full
of words, sighings, warnings, threats, the noises, without doubt, of
wandering powers, friendly or unfriendly beings.  The water moves,
articulates, prophesies, as, for example, did the Peruvian Rimac and
Ipurimac--'the Oracles,' 'the Prophesiers.' Even abstract qualities
were supposed to possess the attributes of living things.  Light and
darkness, heat and cold, were regarded as active and alert agencies.
The sky was looked upon as the All-Father from whose co-operation with
the Mother Earth all living things had sprung.  This condition of
belief is known as 'animism.'



Totemism

If inanimate objects and natural phenomena were endowed by savage
imagination with the qualities of life and thought, the creatures of
the animal world were placed upon a still higher level.  The Indian,
brought into contact with the denizens of the forest and prairie,
conceived a high opinion of their qualities and instinctive abilities.
He observed that they {81} possessed greater cunning in forest-craft
than himself, that their hunting instinct was much more sure, that they
seldom suffered from lack of provisions, that they were more swift of
foot.  In short, he considered them to be his superiors in those
faculties which he most coveted and admired.  Various human attributes
and characteristics became personified and even exaggerated in some of
his neighbours of wood and plain.  The fox was proverbial for craft,
the wild cat for stealth, the bear for a wrong-headed stupidity, the
owl for a cryptic wisdom, the deer for swiftness.  In each of these
attributes the several animals to whom they belonged appeared to the
savage as more gifted than himself, and so deeply was he influenced by
this seeming superiority that if he coveted a certain quality he would
place himself under the protection of the animal or bird which
symbolized it.  Again, if a tribe or clan possessed any special
characteristic, such as fierceness or cunning, it was usually called by
its neighbours after the bird or beast which symbolized its character.
A tribe would learn its nickname from captives taken in war; or it
might even bestow such an appellation upon itself.  After the lapse of
a few generations the members of a tribe would regard the animal whose
qualities they were supposed to possess as their direct ancestor, and
would consider that all the members of his species were their
blood-relations.  This belief is known as totemism, and its adoption
was the means of laying the foundation of a widespread system of tribal
rule and custom, by which marriage and many of the affairs of life were
and are wholly governed.  Probably all European and Asiatic peoples
have passed through this stage, and its remains are to be found deeply
embedded in our present social system.

{82}

Totemic Law and Custom

Few generations would elapse before the sense of ancestral devotion to
the totem or eponymous forefather of the tribe would become so strong
as to be exalted into a fully developed system of worship of him as a
deity.  That the totem develops into the god is proved by the animal
likeness and attributes of many deities in lands widely separate.  It
accounts for the jackal- and ibis-headed gods of Egypt, the bull-like
deities of Assyria, the bestial gods of Hindustan--possibly even for
the owl which accompanied the Grecian Pallas, for does not Homer speak
of her as 'owl-eyed'?  May not this goddess have developed from an owl
totem, and may not the attendant bird of night which perches on her
shoulder have been permitted to remain as a sop to her devotees in her
more ancient form, who objected to her portrayal as a human being, and
desired that some reminder of her former shape might be preserved?
That our British ancestors possessed a totemic system is undoubted.
Were not the clan Chattan of the Scottish Highlands the "sons of the
cat"?  In the _Dean of Lismores Book_ we read of a tribe included under
the "sons to the king of Rualay" one battalion of whom was
'cat-headed,' or wore the totem crest of the cat.  The swine-gods and
other animal deities possessed by the British Celts assist this theory,
as do the remains of many folk-customs in England and Scotland.  Our
crests are but so many family symbols which have come down to us from
the distant days when our forefathers painted them upon their shields
or wore them upon their helmets as the badge of their tribe, and thus
of its supposed beast-progenitor or protector.

As has been said, a vast and intricate system of tribal {83} law and
custom arose from the adoption of totemism.  The animal from which the
tribe took its name might not be killed or eaten, because of its
blood-kinship with the clan.  Descent from this ancestor postulated
kinship between the various members of the tribe, male and female;
therefore the female members were not eligible for marriage with the
males, who had perforce to seek for wives elsewhere.  This often led to
the partial adoption of another tribe or family in the vicinity, and of
its totem, in order that a suitable exchange of women might be made as
occasion required, and thus to the inclusion of two _gentes_ or
divisions within the tribe, each with its different totem-name, yet
each regarding itself as a division of the tribal family.  Thus a
member of the 'Fox' _gens_ might not marry a woman of his own division,
but must seek a bride from the 'Bears,' and similarly a 'Bear'
tribesman must find a wife from among the 'Foxes.'



Severity of Totemic Rule

The utmost severity attached to the observation of totemic law and
custom, to break which was regarded as a serious crime.  Indeed, no one
ever thought of infringing it, so powerful are habit and the force of
association.  It is not necessary to specify here the numerous customs
which may be regarded as the outcome of the totemic system, for many of
these have little in common with mythology proper.  It will suffice to
say that they were observed with a rigour beside which the rules of the
religions of civilized peoples appear lax and indulgent.  As this
system exercised such a powerful influence on Indian life and thought,
the following passage from the pen of a high authority on Indian
totemism may be quoted with advantage:[1]


[1] J. R. Swanton, in _Handbook of the North American Indians_.


{84}

"The native American Indian, holding peculiar self-centred views as to
the unity and continuity of all life and the consequent inevitable
interrelations of the several bodies and beings in nature, especially
of man to the beings and bodies of his experience and environment, to
whom were imputed by him various anthropomorphic attributes and
functions in addition to those naturally inherent in them, has
developed certain fundamentally important cults, based on those views,
that deeply affect his social, religious, and civil institutions.  One
of these doctrines is that persons and organizations of persons are one
and all under the protecting and fostering tutelage of some imaginary
being or spirit.  These tutelary or patron beings may be grouped, by
the mode and motive of their acquirement and their functions, into two
fairly well defined groups or classes: (1) those which protect
individuals only, and (2) those which protect organizations of persons.
But with these two classes of tutelary beings is not infrequently
confounded another class of protective imaginary beings, commonly
called fetishes, which are regarded as powerful spiritual allies of
their possessors.  Each of these several classes of guardian beings has
its own peculiar traditions, beliefs, and appropriate cult.  The modes
of the acquirement and the motives for the acquisition of these several
classes of guardian beings differ in some fundamental and essential
respects.  The exact method of acquiring the clan or gentile group
patrons or tutelaries is still an unsolved problem, although several
plausible theories have been advanced by astute students to explain the
probable mode of obtaining them.  With respect to the personal tutelary
and the fetish, the data are sufficiently clear and full to permit a
satisfactory description and definition of these two classes of
tutelary and auxiliary beings.  From the available data bearing {85} on
this subject, it would seem that much confusion regarding the use and
acquirement of personal and communal tutelaries or patron beings has
arisen by regarding certain social, political, and religious activities
as due primarily to the influence of these guardian deities, when in
fact those features were factors in the social organization on which
has been later imposed the cult of the patron or guardian spirit.
Exogamy, names and class names, and various taboos exist where 'totems'
and 'totemism,' the cults of the guardian spirits, do not exist.

"Some profess to regard the clan or gentile group patron or tutelary as
a mere development of the personal guardian, but from the available but
insufficient data bearing on the question it appears to be, in some of
its aspects, more closely connected in origin, or rather in the method
of its acquisition, with the fetish, the Iroquois _otchina ken'da_, 'an
effective agency of sorcery,' than with any form of the personal
tutelary.  This patron spirit of course concerns the group regarded as
a body, for with regard to each person of the group, the clan or
gentile guardian is inherited, or rather acquired by birth, and it may
not be changed at will.  On the other hand, the personal tutelary is
obtained through the rite of vision in a dream or a trance, and it must
be preserved at all hazards as one of the most precious possessions.
The fetish is acquired by personal choice, by purchase, or by
inheritance, or from some chance circumstance or emergency, and it can
be sold or discarded at the will of the possessor in most cases; the
exception is where a person has entered into a compact with some evil
spirit or being that, in consideration of human or other sacrifices in
its honour at stated periods, the said spirit undertakes to perform
certain obligations to this man or woman, and in default of which the
person forfeits his right to live.

{86}

"'Totemism' is a purely philosophical term which modern anthropological
literature has burdened with a great mass of needless controversial
speculation and opinion.  The doctrine and use of tutelary or patron
guardian spirits by individuals and by organized bodies of persons are
defined by Powell as 'a method of naming,' and as 'the doctrine and
system of naming.'  But the motive underlying the acquisition and use
of guardian or tutelary spirits, whether by an individual or by an
organized body of persons, is always the same--namely, to obtain
welfare and to avoid ill-fare.  So it appears to be erroneous to define
this cult as 'the doctrine and system of naming.'  It is rather the
recognition, exploitation, and adjustment of the imaginary mystic
relation of the individual or of the body of organized persons to the
postulated _orendas_, mystic powers, surrounding each of these units of
native society.  With but few exceptions, the recognized relation
between the clan or _gens_ and its patron deity is not one of descent
or source, but rather that of protection, guardianship, and support.
The relationship as to source between these two classes of superior
beings is not yet determined; so to avoid confusion in concepts, it is
better to use distinctive names for them, until their connexion, if
any, has been definitely ascertained: this question must not be
prejudged.  The hypothetic inclusion of these several classes in a
general one, branded with the rubric 'totem' or its equivalent, has led
to needless confusion.  The native tongues have separate names for
these objects, and until the native classification can be truthfully
shown to be erroneous it would seem to be advisable to designate them
by distinctive names.  Notwithstanding the great amount of study of the
literature of the social features of aboriginal American society, there
are many data {87} relative to this subject that have been overlooked
or disregarded."



Fetishism

Side by side with animism and totemism flourishes a third type of
primitive belief, known as 'fetishism.'  This word is derived from the
Portuguese _feitiço_, 'a charm,' 'something made by art,' and is
applied to any object, large or small, natural or artificial, regarded
as possessing consciousness, volition, and supernatural qualities, and
especially _orenda_, or magic power.

As has been said, the Indian intelligence regards all things, animals,
water, the earth, trees, stones, the heavenly bodies, even night and
day, and such properties as light and darkness, as possessing animation
and the power of volition.  It is, however, the general Indian belief
that many of these are under some spell or potent enchantment.  The
rocks and trees are confidently believed by the Indian to be the living
tombs of imprisoned spirits, resembling the dryads of Greek folk-lore,
so that it is not difficult for him to conceive an intelligence, more
or less potent, in any object, no matter how uncommon--indeed, the more
uncommon the greater the probability of its being the abode of some
powerful intelligence, incarcerated for revenge or some similar motive
by the spell of a mighty enchanter.

The fetish is, in short, a mascot--a luck-bringer.  The civilized
person who attaches a swastika or small charm to his watch-chain or her
bangle is unconsciously following in the footsteps of many pagan
ancestors; but with this difference, that the idea that 'luck' resides
in the trinket is weak in the civilized mind, whereas in the savage
belief the 'luck' resident in the fetish is a powerful and living
thing--an intelligence {88} which must be placated with prayer, feast,
and sacrifice.  Fetishes which lose their reputations as bringers of
good-fortune usually degenerate into mere amulets or talismanic
ornaments, and their places are taken by others.  The fetish differs
from the class of tutelary or 'household' gods in that it may be sold
or bartered, whereas tutelary or domestic deities are never to be
purchased, or even loaned.



Fetish Objects

Nearly all the belongings of a _shaman_, or medicine-man, are classed
as fetishes by the North American Indians.  These usually consist of
the skins of beasts, birds, and serpents, roots, bark, powder, and
numberless other objects.  But the fetish must be altogether divorced
from the idea of religion proper, with which it has little or no
connexion, being found side by side with religious phases of many
types.  The fetish may be a bone, a feather, an arrow-head, a stick,
carved or painted, a fossil, a tuft of hair, a necklace of fingers, a
stuffed skin, the hand of an enemy, anything which might be suggested
to the original possessor in a dream or a flight of imagination.  It is
sometimes fastened to the scalp-lock, to the dress, to the bridle,
concealed between the layers of a shield, or specially deposited in a
shrine in the wigwam.  The idea in the mind of the original maker is
usually symbolic, and is revealed only to one formally chosen as heir
to the magical possession, and pledged in his turn to a similar secrecy.

Notwithstanding that the cult of fetishism is not, strictly speaking, a
department of religious activity, a point exists at which the fetish
begins to evolve into a god.  This happens when the object survives the
test of experience and achieves a more than personal or {89} tribal
popularity.  Nevertheless the fetish partakes more of the nature of
those spirits which are subservient to man (for example, the Arabian
_jinn_) than of gods proper, and if it is prayed and sacrificed to on
occasion, the 'prayers' are rather of the nature of a magical
invocation, and the 'sacrifices' no more than would be accorded to any
other assisting agent.  Thus sharply must we differentiate between a
fetish or captive spirit and a god.  But it must be further borne in
mind that a fetish is not necessarily a piece of personal property.  It
may belong collectively to an entire community.  It is not necessarily
a small article, but may possess all the appearances of a full-blown
idol.  An idol, however, is the abode of a god--the image into which a
deity may materialize.  A fetish, on the other hand, is _the place of
imprisonment of a subservient spirit_, which cannot escape, and, if it
would gain the rank of godhead, must do so by a long series of
luck-bringing, or at least by the performance of a number of marvels of
a protective or fortune-making nature.  It is not unlikely that a
belief exists in the Indian mind that there are many wandering spirits
who, in return for food and other comforts, are willing to materialize
in the shape the savage provides for them, and to assist him in the
chase and other pursuits of life.



Apache Fetishes

Among the Athapascan Indians the Apaches, both male and female, wear
fetishes which they call _tzi-daltai_, manufactured from
lightning-riven wood, generally pine or cedar, or fir from the
mountains.  These are highly valued, and are never sold.  They are
shaved very thin, rudely carved in the semblance of the human form, and
decorated with incised lines representing the lightning.  They are
small in size, and few of them are painted.  {90} Bourke describes one
that an Apache chief carried about with him, which was made of a piece
of lath, unpainted, having a figure in yellow drawn upon it, with a
narrow black band and three snake's heads with white eyes.  It was
further decorated with pearl buttons and small eagle-down feathers.
The reverse and obverse were identical.

Many of the Apaches attached a piece of malachite to their guns and
bows to make them shoot accurately.  Bourke mentions a class of
fetishes which he terms 'phylacteries.'  These are pieces of buckskin
or other material upon which are inscribed certain characters or
symbols of a religious or 'medicine' nature, and they are worn attached
to the person who seeks benefit from them.  They differ from the
ordinary fetish in that they are concealed from the public gaze.  These
'phylacteries,' Bourke says, "themselves medicine," may be employed to
enwrap other 'medicine,' and "thus augment their own potentialities."
He describes several of these objects.  One worn by an Indian named
Ta-ul-tzu-je "was tightly rolled in at least half a mile of saddler's
silk, and when brought to light was found to consist of a small piece
of buckskin two inches square, upon which were drawn red and yellow
crooked lines, which represented the red and yellow snake.  Inside were
a piece of malachite and a small cross of lightning-riven pine, and two
very small perforated shells.  The cross they designated 'the black
mind.'"  Another 'phylactery' consisted of a tiny bag of hoddentin,
holding a small quartz crystal and four feathers of eagle-down.  This
charm, it was explained by an Indian, contained not merely the
'medicine' of the crystal and the eagle, but also that of the black
bear, the white lion, and the yellow snake.


{91}

Iroquoian Fetishes

Things that seem at all unusual are accepted by the Hurons, a tribe of
the Iroquois, as _oky_, or supernatural, and therefore it is accounted
lucky to find them.  In hunting, if they find a stone or other object
in the entrails of an animal they at once make a fetish of it.  Any
object of a peculiar shape they treasure for the same reason.  They
greatly fear that demons or evil spirits will purloin their fetishes,
which they esteem so highly as to propitiate them in feasts and invoke
them in song.  The highest type of fetish obtainable by a Huron was a
piece of the onniont, or great armoured serpent, a mythological animal
revered by many North American tribes.



Fetishism among the Algonquins

Hoffmann states that at the 'medicine' lodges of some Algonquian tribes
there are preserved fetishes or amulets worn above the elbows,
consisting of strands of bead-work, metal bands, or skunk skins, while
bracelets of shells, buckskin, or metal are also worn.  A great tribal
fetish of the Cheyenne was their 'medicine' arrow, which was taken from
them by the Pawnees in battle.  The head of this arrow projects from
the bag which contains it, and it is covered with delicate waved or
spiral lines, which denote its sacred character.  It was, indeed, the
palladium of the tribe.  A peculiar type of fetish consisted of a
mantle made from the skin of a deer and covered with feathers mixed
with headings.  It was made and used by the medicine-men as a mantle of
invisibility, or charmed covering to enable spies to traverse an
enemy's country in security.  In this instance the fetishistic power
depended upon the devices drawn upon the article.  The principal
fetishes among {92} the Hidatsa tribe of the Sioux are the skins of
foxes and wolves, the favourite worn fetish being the stripe from the
back of a wolf-skin with the tail hanging down the shoulders.  A slit
is made in the skin, through which the warrior puts his head, so that
the skin of the wolf's head hangs down upon his breast.  The most
common tribal fetishes of the Sioux are, or were, buffalo heads, the
neck-bones of which they preserve in the belief that the buffalo herds
will thereby be prevented from removing to too great a distance.  At
certain periods they perform a ceremony with these bones, which
consists in taking a potsherd filled with embers, throwing
sweet-smelling grease upon it, and fumigating the bones with the smoke.
There are certain trees and stones which are regarded as fetishes.  To
these offerings of red cloth, red paint, and other articles are made.
Each individual has his personal fetish, and it is carried in all
hunting and warlike excursions.  It usually consists of a head, claws,
stuffed skin, or other representative feature of the fetish animal.
Even the horses are provided with fetishes, in the shape of a deer's
horn, to ensure their swiftness.  The rodent teeth of the beaver are
regarded as potent charms, and are worn by little girls round their
necks to make them industrious.

At Sikyatki, in Arizona, a territorial nucleus of the Hopi Indians, Mr.
Fewkes had opportunities of inspecting many interesting fetish forms.
A number of these discovered in native graves were pebbles with a
polished surface, or having a fancied resemblance to some animal shape.
Many of the personal fetishes of the Hopi consist of fossils, some of
which attain the rank of tribal fetishes and are wrapped up in sacred
bundles, which are highly venerated.  In one grave was found a single
large fetish in the shape of a mountain {93} lion, made of sandstone,
in which legs, ears, tail, and eyes are represented, the mouth still
showing the red pigment with which it had been coloured.  This is
almost identical with some fetishes used by the Hopi at the present day.



Totemism and Fetishism Meet

Fetishism among the Zuñi Indians of the south arose from an idea they
entertained that they were kin with animals; in other words, their
fetishes were totemistic.  Totemism and fetishism were by no means
incompatible with one another, but often flourished side by side.
Fetishism of the Zuñi description is, indeed, the natural concomitant
of a totemic system.  Zuñi fetishes are usually concretions of lime or
objects in which a natural resemblance to animals has been heightened
by artificial means.  Ancient fetishes are much valued by these people,
and are often found by them in the vicinity of villages inhabited by
their ancestors, and as tribal possessions are handed down from one
generation to another.  The medicine-men believe them to be the actual
petrifactions of the animals they represent.



The Sun-Children

The Zuñi philosophy of the fetish is given in the "Tale of the Two
Sun-Children" as follows: "Now that the surface of the earth was
hardened even the animals of prey, powerful and like the fathers [gods]
themselves, would have devoured the children of men, and the two
thought it was not well that they should all be permitted to live, for,
said they, 'Alike the children of men and the children of the animals
of prey multiply themselves.  The animals of prey are provided with
talons and teeth; men are but poor, the finished beings of earth,
therefore the weaker.' {94} Whenever they came across the pathway of
one of these animals, were he a great mountain lion or but a mere mole,
they struck him with the fire of lightning which they carried on their
magic shields.  _Thlu!_ and instantly he was shrivelled and turned into
stone.  Then said they to the animals that they had changed into stone,
'That ye may not be evil unto man, but that ye may be a great good unto
them, have we changed you into rock everlasting.  By the magic breath
of prey, by the heart that shall endure for ever within you, shall ye
be made to serve instead of to devour mankind.'  Thus was the surface
of the earth hardened and scorched, and many of all kinds of beings
changed to stone.  Thus, too, it happens that we find here and there
throughout the world their forms, sometimes large, like the beings
themselves, sometimes shrivelled and distorted, and we often see among
the rocks the forms of many beings that live no longer, which shows us
that all was different in the 'days of the new.'  Of these
petrifactions, which are, of course, mere concretions or strangely
shaped rock-forms, the Zuñi say: 'Whomsoever of us may be met with the
light of such great good-fortune may see them, and should treasure them
for the sake of the sacred [magic] power which was given them in the
days of the new.'"[2]


[2] Cushing's _Zuñi Fetiches_ (1883).



The Prey-Gods

This tradition furnishes additional evidence relative to the preceding
statement, and is supposed to enlighten the Zuñi Indian as to wherein
lies the power of fetishes.  It is thought that the hearts of the great
animals of prey are infused with a 'medicinal' or magic influence over
the hearts of the animals they prey upon, and {95} that they overcome
them with their breath, piercing their hearts and quite numbing them.
Moreover, their roar is fatal to the senses of the lower beasts.  The
mountain lion absorbs the blood of the game animals, therefore he
possesses their acute senses.  Again, those powers, as derived from his
heart, are preserved in his fetish, since his heart still lives, even
although his body be changed to stone.  It happens, therefore, that the
use of these fetishes is chiefly connected with the chase.  But there
are exceptions.  The great animals of the chase, although fetishistic,
are also regarded as supernatural beings, the mythological position of
which is absolutely defined.  In the City of the Mists lives
Po-shai-an-K'ia, father of the 'medicine' societies, a culture-hero
deity, whose abode is guarded by six beings known as the 'Prey-Gods,'
and it is their counterfeit presentments that are made use of as
fetishes.  To the north of the City of the Mists dwells the Mountain
Lion prey-god, to the west the Bear, to the south the Badger, to the
east the Wolf, above the Eagle, below the Mole.  These animals possess
not only the guardianship of the six regions, but also the mastership
of the 'medicine' or magic powers which emanate from them.  They are
the mediators between Po-shai-an-K'ia and man.  The prey-gods, as
'Makers of the Path of Life,' are given high rank among the gods, but
notwithstanding this their fetishes are "held as in captivity" by the
priests of the various 'medicine' orders, and greatly venerated by them
as mediators between themselves and the animals they represent.  In
this character they are exhorted with elaborate prayers, rituals, and
ceremonials, and sometimes placated with sacrifices of the prey-gods of
the hunt (_we-ma-a-ha-i_).  Their special priests are the members of
the Great Coyote {96} People--that is, they consist of eleven members
of the Eagle and Coyote clans and of the Prey Brothers priesthood.
These prey-gods appear to be almost unique, and may be indicated as an
instance of fetishism becoming allied with religious belief.  They
depict, with two exceptions, the same species of prey animals as those
supposed to guard the six regions, the exceptions being the coyote and
the wild cat.  These six prey animals are subdivided into six
varieties.  They are, strictly speaking, the property of the priests,
and members and priests of the sacred societies are required to deposit
their fetishes, when not in use, with the Keeper of the Medicine of the
Deer.  These 'medicines' or memberships alone can perfect the shape of
the fetishes and worship them.



The Council of Fetishes

The Day of the Council of the Fetishes takes place a little before or
after the winter solstice or national New Year.  The fetishes are taken
from their places of deposit, and arranged according to species and
colour in the form of a symbolic altar, quadrupeds being placed upright
and birds suspended from the roof.  The fetishes are prayed to, and
prayer-meal is scattered over them.  Chants are intoned, and a dance
performed in which the cries of the fetish beasts are imitated.  A
prayer with responses follows.  Finally all assemble round the altar
and repeat the great invocation.



The Fetish in Hunting

The use of fetishes in hunting among the Zuñi is extremely curious and
involved in its nature.  The hunter goes to the house of the Deer
Medicine, where the vessel containing the fetish is brought out and
placed before him.  He sprinkles meal over the sacred {97} vessel in
the direction in which he intends to hunt, chooses a fetish from it,
and presses it to his lips with an inspiration.  He then places the
fetish in a buckskin bag over his heart.  Proceeding to the hunt, he
deposits a spider-knot of yucca leaves where an animal has rested,
imitates its cry, and is supposed by this means to confine its
movements within a narrow circle.  He then inspires deeply from the
nostrils of the fetish, as though inhaling the magic breath of the god
of prey, and then puffs the breath long and loudly in the direction
whence the beast's tracks trend, in the belief that the breath he has
borrowed from the prey-god will stiffen the limbs of the animal he
hunts.  When the beast is caught and killed he inhales its suspiring
breath, which he breathes into the nostrils of the fetish.  He then
dips the fetish in the blood of the slain quarry, sips the blood
himself, and devours the liver, in order that he may partake of the
animal's qualities.  The fetish is then placed in the sun to dry, and
lastly replaced in the buckskin pouch with a blessing, afterward being
duly returned to the Keeper of the Deer Medicine.



Indian Theology

The late Professor Brinton, writing on the Indian attitude toward the
eternal verities, says:[3]


[3] _Myths of the New World_.


"Nature, to the heathen, is no harmonious whole swayed by eternal
principles, but a chaos of causeless effects, the meaningless play of
capricious ghosts.  He investigates not, because he doubts not.  All
events are to him miracles.  Therefore his faith knows no bounds, and
those who teach him that doubt is sinful must contemplate him with
admiration....

"Natural religions rarely offer more than this negative opposition to
reason.  They are tolerant to {98} a degree.  The savage, void of any
clear conception of a supreme deity, sets up no claim that his is the
only true church.  If he is conquered in battle he imagines that it is
owing to the inferiority of his own gods to those of his victor, and he
rarely, therefore, requires any other reasons to make him a convert.

"In this view of the relative powers of deities lay a potent corrective
to the doctrine that the fate of man was dependent on the caprices of
the gods.  For no belief was more universal than that which assigned to
each individual a guardian spirit.  This invisible monitor was an
ever-present help in trouble.  He suggested expedients, gave advice and
warning in dreams, protected in danger, and stood ready to foil the
machinations of enemies, divine or human.

"With unlimited faith in this protector, attributing to him the devices
suggested by his own quick wits and the fortunate chances of life, the
savage escaped the oppressive thought that he was the slave of demoniac
forces, and dared the dangers of the forest and the war-path without
anxiety.

"By far the darkest side of such a religion is that which it presents
to morality.  The religious sense is by no means the voice of
conscience.  The Takahli Indian when sick makes a full and free
confession of sins, but a murder, however unnatural and unprovoked, he
does not mention, not counting it a crime.  Scenes of licentiousness
were approved and sustained throughout the continent as acts of
worship; maidenhood was in many parts freely offered up or claimed by
the priests as a right; in Central America twins were slain for
religious motives; human sacrifice was common throughout the tropics,
and was not unusual in higher latitudes; cannibalism was often
enjoined; and in Peru, Florida, and Central America it was not {99}
uncommon for parents to slay their own children at the behest of a
priest.

"The philosophical moralist contemplating such spectacles has thought
to recognize in them one consoling trait.  All history, it has been
said, shows man living under an irritated God, and seeking to appease
him by sacrifice of blood; the essence of all religion, it has been
added, lies in that of which sacrifice is the symbol--namely, in the
offering up of self, in the rendering up of our will to the will of God.

"But sacrifice, when not a token of gratitude, cannot be thus
explained.  It is not a rendering up, but a _substitution_ of our will
for God's will.  A deity is angered by neglect of his dues; he will
revenge, certainly, terribly, we know not how or when.  But as
punishment is all he desires, if we punish ourselves he will be
satisfied; and far better is such self-inflicted torture than a fearful
looking-for of judgment to come.  Craven fear, not without some dim
sense of the implacability of nature's laws, is at its roots.

"Looking only at this side of religion, the ancient philosopher averred
that the gods existed solely in the apprehensions of their votaries,
and the moderns have asserted that 'fear is the father of religion,
love her late-born daughter'; that 'the first form of religious belief
is nothing else but a horror of the unknown,' and that 'no natural
religion appears to have been able to develop from a germ within itself
anything whatever of real advantage to civilization.'

"Looking around for other standards wherewith to measure the progress
of the knowledge of divinity in the New World, _prayer_ suggests itself
as one of the least deceptive.  'Prayer,' to quote the words of
Novalis, 'is in religion what thought is in philosophy.  The religious
sense prays, as the reason thinks.'  Guizot, {100} carrying the
analysis farther, thinks that it is prompted by a painful conviction of
the inability of our will to conform to the dictates of reason.

"Originally it was connected with the belief that divine caprice, not
divine law, governs the universe, and that material benefits rather
than spiritual gifts are to be desired.  The gradual recognition of its
limitations and proper objects marks religious advancement.  The Lord's
Prayer contains seven petitions, only one of which is for a temporal
advantage, and it the least that can be asked for.

"What immeasurable interval between it and the prayer of the Nootka
Indian preparing for war:

"'Great Quahootze, let me live, not be sick, find the enemy, not fear
him, find him asleep, and kill a great many of him.'

"Or, again, between it and a petition of a Huron to a local god, heard
by Father Brébeuf:

"'Oki, thou who liveth in this spot, I offer thee tobacco.  Help us,
save us from shipwreck, defend us from our enemies, give us a good
trade and bring us back safe and sound to our villages.'

"This is a fair specimen of the supplications of the lowest religions.
Another equally authentic is given by Father Allouez.  In 1670 he
penetrated to an outlying Algonkin village, never before visited by a
white man.  The inhabitants, startled by his pale face and long black
gown, took him for a divinity.  They invited him to the council lodge,
a circle of old men gathered round him, and one of them, approaching
him with a double handful of tobacco, thus addressed him, the others
grunting approval:

"'This indeed is well, Blackrobe, that thou dost visit us.  Have mercy
upon us.  Thou art a Manito.  We give thee to smoke.

{101}

"'The Naudowessies and Iroquois are devouring us.  Have mercy upon us.

"'We are often sick; our children die; we are hungry.  Have mercy upon
us.  Hear me, O Manito, I give thee to smoke.

"'Let the earth yield us corn; the rivers give us fish; sickness not
slay us; nor hunger so torment us.  Hear us, O Manito, we give thee to
smoke.'

"In this rude but touching petition, wrung from the heart of a
miserable people, nothing but their wretchedness is visible.  Not the
faintest trace of an aspiration for spiritual enlightenment cheers the
eye of the philanthropist, not the remotest conception that through
suffering we are purified can be detected."



The Indian Idea of God

The mythologies of the several stocks of the Red Race differ widely in
conception and detail, and this has led many hasty investigators to
form the conclusion that they were therefore of separate origin.  But
careful study has proved that they accord with all great mythological
systems in their fundamental principles, and therefore with each other.
The idea of God, often strange and grotesque perhaps, was nevertheless
powerfully expressed in the Indian mythologies.  Each division of the
race possessed its own word to signify 'spirit.'  Some of these words
meant 'that which is above,' 'the higher one,' 'the invisible,' and
these attributes accorded to deity show that the original Indian
conception of it was practically the same as those which obtained among
the primitive peoples of Europe and Asia.  The idea of God was that of
a great prevailing force who resided "in the sky."  Savage or primitive
man observes that all brightness emanates from the firmament above him.
His eyes are dazzled by its splendour.  Therefore he {102} concludes
that it must be the abode of the source of all life, of all spiritual
excellence.



'Good' and 'Bad'

Before man has discovered the uses of that higher machinery of reason,
philosophy, and has learned to marshal his theological ideas by its
light, such deities as he worships conform very much to his own ethical
standard.  They mirror his morality, or lack of it.  They are, like
himself, savage, cruel, insatiable in their appetites.  Very likely,
too, the bestial attributes of the totemic gods cling to those deities
who have been evolved out of that system.  Among savage people ideas of
good and evil as we conceive them are non-existent.  To them 'good'
merely implies everything which is to their advantage, 'evil' that
which injures or distresses them.  It is only when such a system as
totemism, with its intricate taboos and stringent laws bearing on the
various relationships of life, comes to be adopted that a 'moral' order
arises.  Slaughter of the totem animal becomes a 'crime'--sacrilege.
Slaughter of a member of the totem clan, of a blood-brother, must be
atoned for because he is of the totem blood.  Marriage with a woman of
the same totem blood becomes an offence.  Neglect to pay fitting homage
and sacrifice to the gods or totem is regarded with severity,
especially when the evolution of a priestly caste has been achieved.
As the totem is an ancestor, so all ancestors are looked upon with
reverence, and deference to living progenitors becomes a virtue.  In
such ways a code of 'morality' is slowly but certainly produced.



No 'Good' or 'Bad' Gods

But, oddly enough, the gods are usually exempt from these laws by which
their worshippers are bound.  {103} We find them murderous, unfilial,
immoral, polygamous, and often irreverent.  This may be accounted for
by the circumstance that their general outlines were filled in before
totemism had become a fully developed system, or it may mean that the
savage did not believe that divine beings could be fettered by such
laws as he felt himself bound to obey.  However that may be, we find
the American gods neither better nor worse than those of other
mythological systems.  Some of them are prone to a sort of Puckish
trickery and are fond of practical joking: they had not reached the
exalted nobility of the pantheon of Olympus.  But what is more
remarkable--and this applies to the deities of all primitive races--we
find that they possess no ideas of good and evil.  We find them
occasionally worshipping gods of their own--usually the creative
deities--and that may perhaps be accounted unto them for righteousness.
But they are only 'good' to their worshippers inasmuch as they ensure
them abundant crops or game, and only 'bad' when they cease to do so.
They are not worshipped because they are the founts of truth and
justice, but for the more immediately cogent reason that, unless
placated by the steam of sacrifice, they will cease to provide an
adequate food-supply to man, and may malevolently send destruction upon
their neglectful worshippers.  In the relations between god and man
among early peoples a specific contract is implied: "Sacrifice unto us,
provide us with those offerings the steam of which is our food,
continue to do so, and we will see to it that you do not lack crops and
game and the essentials of life.  Fail to observe these customs and you
perish."  Under such a system it will readily be granted that such
horrors as human sacrifice were only undertaken because they were
thought to be absolutely necessary to the existence {104} of the race
as a whole, and were not prompted by any mere wanton delight in
bloodshed.

Dealing with this point, the late Professor Brinton says in his _Myths
of the New World_:

"The confusion of these distinct ideas [monotheism and polytheism] has
led to much misconception of the native creeds.  But another and more
fatal error was that which distorted them into a dualistic form,
ranging on one hand the good spirit with his legion of angels, on the
other the evil one with his swarm of fiends, representing the world as
the scene of their unending conflict, man as the unlucky football who
gets all the blows.

"This notion, which has its historical origin among the Parsees of
ancient Iran, is unknown to savage nations.  'The Hidatsa,' says Dr.
Matthews, 'believe neither in a hell nor a devil.'  'The idea of the
devil,' justly observes Jacob Grimm, 'is foreign to all primitive
religions.'  Yet Professor Mueller, in his voluminous work on those of
America, after approvingly quoting this saying, complacently proceeds
to classify the deities as good or bad spirits!

"This view, which has obtained without question in earlier works on the
native religions of America, has arisen partly from habits of thought
difficult to break, partly from mistranslations of native words, partly
from the foolish axiom of the early missionaries, 'The gods of the
Gentiles are devils.'  Yet their own writings furnish conclusive proof
that no such distinction existed out of their own fancies.  The same
word(_otkon_) which Father Bruyas employs to translate into Iroquois
the term 'devil,' in the passage 'The devil took upon himself the
figure of a serpent,' he is obliged to use for 'spirit' in the phrase,
'At the resurrection we shall be spirits,' which is a rather amusing
illustration how {105} impossible it was by any native word to convey
the idea of the spirit of evil.

"When, in 1570, Father Rogel commenced his labours among the tribes
near the Savannah River, he told them that the deity they adored was a
demon who loved all evil things, and they must hate him; whereas his
auditors replied, that so far from this being the case, he whom he
called a wicked being was the power that sent them all good things, and
indignantly left the missionary to preach to the winds.

"A passage often quoted in support of this mistaken view is one in
Winslow's _Good News from New England_, written in 1622.  The author
says that the Indians worship a good power called Kiehtan, and another
'who, as farre as wee can conceive, is the Devill,' named Hobbamock, or
Hobbamoqui.  The former of these names is merely the word 'great,' in
their dialect of Algonkin, with a final _N_, and is probably an
abbreviation of Kittanitowit, the great Manitou, a vague term mentioned
by Roger Williams and other early writers, manufactured probably by
them and not the appellation of any personified deity.  The latter, so
far from corresponding to the power of evil, was, according to
Winslow's own statement, the kindly god who cured diseases, aided them
in the chase, and appeared to them in dreams as their protector.
Therefore, with great justice, Dr. Jarvis has explained it to mean 'the
_oke_ or tutelary deity which each Indian worships,' as the word itself
signifies.

"So in many instances it turns out that what has been reported to be
the evil divinity of a nation, to whom they pray to the neglect of a
better one, is in reality the highest power they recognize."



{106}

Creation-Myths

The mythologies of the Red Man are infinitely more rich in creative and
deluge myths than those of any other race in the two hemispheres.
Tales which deal with the origin of man are exceedingly frequent, and
exhibit every phase of the type of creative story.  Although many of
these are similar to European and Asiatic myths of the same class,
others show great originality, and strikingly present to our minds the
characteristics of American aboriginal thought.

The creation-myths of the various Indian tribes differ as much from one
another as do those of Europe and Asia.  In some we find the great gods
moulding the universe, in others we find them merely discovering it.
Still others lead their people from subterranean depths to the upper
earth.  In many Indian myths we find the world produced by the
All-Father sun, who thickens the clouds into water, which becomes the
sea.  In the Zuñi record of creation Awonawilona, the creator,
fecundates the sea with his own flesh, and hatches it with his own
heat.  From this green scums are formed, which become the fourfold
mother Earth and the all-covering father Sky, from whom sprang all
creatures.  "Then from the nethermost of the four caves of the world
the seed of men and the creatures took form and grew; even as with eggs
in warm places worms quickly form and appear, and, growing, soon burst
their shells and there emerge, as may happen, birds, tadpoles, or
serpents: so man and all creatures grew manifoldly and multiplied in
many kinds.  Thus did the lowermost world-cave become overfilled with
living things, full of unfinished creatures, crawling like reptiles
over one another in black darkness, thickly crowding together and
treading one on another, one {107} spitting on another and doing other
indecency, in such manner that the murmurings and lamentations became
loud, and many amidst the growing confusion sought to escape, growing
wiser and more manlike.  Then Po-shai-an-K'ia, the foremost and the
wisest of men, arising from the nethermost sea, came among men and the
living things, and pitying them, obtained egress from that first
world-cave through such a dark and narrow path that some seeing
somewhat, crowding after, could not follow him, so eager mightily did
they strive one with another.  Alone then did Po-shai-an-K'ia come from
one cave to another into this world, then island-like, lying amidst the
world-waters, vast, wet, and unstable.  He sought and found the
Sun-Father, and besought him to deliver the men and the creatures from
that nethermost world."[4]


[4] Cushing, _13th Report_, Bureau of American Ethnology.



Algonquian Creation-Myth

In many other Indian mythologies we find the wind brooding over the
primeval ocean in the form of a bird.  In some creation-myths
amphibious animals dive into the waters and bring up sufficient mud
with them to form a beginning of the new earth.  In a number of these
tales no actual act of creation is recorded, but a reconstruction of
matter only.  The Algonquins relate that their great god Michabo, when
hunting one day with wolves for dogs, was surprised to see the animals
enter a great lake and disappear.  He followed them into the waters
with the object of rescuing them, but as he did so the lake suddenly
overflowed and submerged the entire earth.  Michabo despatched a raven
with directions to find a piece of earth which might serve as a nucleus
for a new world, but the bird returned from its quest unsuccessful.
Then the god sent an {108} otter on a like errand, but it too failed to
bring back the needful terrestrial germ.  At last a musk-rat was sent
on the same mission, and it returned with sufficient earth to enable
Michabo to recreate the solid land.  The trees had become denuded of
their branches, so the god discharged arrows at them, which provided
them with new boughs.  After this Michabo married the musk-rat, and
from their union sprang the human race.



The Muskhogean Creation-Story

The Muskhogean Indians believe that in the beginning the primeval waste
of waters alone was visible.  Over the dreary expanse two pigeons or
doves flew hither and thither, and in course of time observed a single
blade of grass spring above the surface.  The solid earth followed
gradually, and the terrestrial sphere took its present shape.  A great
hill, Nunne Chaha, rose in the midst, and in the centre of this was the
house of the deity Esaugetuh Emissee, the 'Master of Breath.'  He took
the clay which surrounded his abode, and from it moulded the first men,
and as the waters still covered the earth he was compelled to build a
great wall upon which to dry the folk he had made.  Gradually the soft
mud became transformed into bone and flesh, and Esaugetuh was
successful in directing the waters into their proper channels,
reserving the dry land for the men he had created.

This myth closely resembles the story in the Book of Genesis.  The
pigeons appear analogous to the brooding creative Spirit, and the
manufacture of the men out of mud is also striking.  So far is the
resemblance carried that we are almost forced to conclude that this is
one of the instances in which Gospel conceptions have been engrafted on
a native legend.